The information and advice presented in this book are not meant to substitute for the
advice of your physician, your child’s pediatrician, or other trained healthcare
professionals. You are advised to consult with healthcare professionals with regard to
all matters that may require medical attention or diagnosis and to check with a
physician before administering or undertaking any course of treatment or making any
significant changes to your child’s diet.
The names and some identifying characteristics of some of the individuals presented in this
book have been changed to protect their privacy. Any resulting resemblance to persons living
or dead is entirely coincidental and unintentional.
Copyright © 2021 by Edward Hallowell, M.D., and John J. Ratey, M.D.
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Ballantine Books, an imprint of Random House, a division
of Penguin Random House LLC, New York.
Ballantine and the House colophon are registered trademarks of Penguin Random House
LLC.
Grateful acknowledgment is made to ADDitude magazine for permission to reprint the
“ADHD Medication Chart” on this page.
Reprinted with permission from ADDitude magazine. Copyright © 2014.
All rights reserved.
www.attitudemag.com
Hardback ISBN 9780399178733
Ebook ISBN 9780399178757
randomhousebooks.com
Book design by Jo Anne Metsch, adapted for ebook
Cover design: Gillian Macleod
ep_prh_5.6.1_c0_r0

Contents
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Epigraph
Introduction
Chapter 1: A Spectrum of Traits
Chapter 2: Understanding the Demon of the Mind
Chapter 3: The Cerebellum Connection
Chapter 4: The Healing Power of Connection
Chapter 5: Find Your Right Difficult
Chapter 6: Create Stellar Environments
Chapter 7: Move to Focus, Move to Motivate: The Power of Exercise
Chapter 8: Medication: The Most Powerful Tool Everyone Fears
Chapter 9: Putting It All Together: Find Your Feel and Make It Real
Dedication
Acknowledgments
Appendix A: The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Definition of and
Criteria for ADHD (Abridged)
Appendix B: A Compendium of Resources
Select Bibliography
Also by Edward M. Hallowell, M.D., and John J. Ratey, M.D.
About the Authors

No brain is the same.
No brain is the best.
Each brain finds its own special way.
—From a poem written by Edward Hallowell to his five-year-old daughter

I
Introduction
n 1994, we wrote Driven to Distraction, a book that introduced to the
general public a syndrome that most people hadn’t heard of or knew little
about: attention deficit disorder, ADD for short. Since we both have ADD, we
were able to describe it from the inside out, validating for readers the
symptoms and describing what it feels like to live with them. Since we are
also both psychiatrists who work in this field, over the years and based on the
available information and research, we have—between us—written seven
books about assessing and diagnosing this condition and about parenting,
being married to, and treating people who live with it.
Now, at this writing—more than twenty-five years after that first joint
effort—things are quite different in many ways. Not only have most people
heard of ADD, but almost everyone knows someone (if not themselves) who
struggles with it: a schoolmate, a co-worker, a spouse. Teachers and school
administrators are ever on the lookout for it, since a child with undiagnosed
(or mismanaged) ADD can disrupt even the smallest of classrooms while

effort—things are quite different in many ways. Not only have most people
heard of ADD, but almost everyone knows someone (if not themselves) who
struggles with it: a schoolmate, a co-worker, a spouse. Teachers and school
administrators are ever on the lookout for it, since a child with undiagnosed
(or mismanaged) ADD can disrupt even the smallest of classrooms while
failing to fulfill his or her own potential. The term is also now often used with
semi-destigmatized lightness: “I’m so ADD” is a catchall explanation for
scatterbrained, forgetful, or erratic behavior in ourselves and others, diagnosis
or not.
Another change: The abbreviation ADD has been updated to ADHD,
adding the word “hyperactivity” to the mix in order to reflect a more accurate
description of the highs and lows of the lived experience. We use this more
modern—and more official—shorthand throughout this book.

However ubiquitous the term, one thing remains very much and
frustratingly the same: Most people, even now, don’t understand the power,
magnitude, and complexity of this condition. Nor do they know the
tremendous advances in understanding and treatment that have been made in
recent years. They know only caricatures and sound bites of incorrect or
incomplete information. These misconceptions damage millions of people,
preventing them from seeking help or, if they do look for help, from finding
the right kind. In the world of ADHD, ignorance remains public enemy
number one.
For instance, many think it’s a child’s condition, and one they’ll grow out
of. In fact, even if someone is diagnosed as a child, we now know that people
don’t grow out of it—it is as much an issue for adults. The people who seem
to grow out of it actually learned to compensate so well that they appear not
to have it. We also know that ADHD can crop up for the first time in
adulthood. This often happens when the demands of life exceed the person’s
ability to deal with them. Classic examples are when a woman has her first
baby or when a student starts medical school. In both instances the
organizational demands of daily life skyrocket and the person shows the
symptoms of ADHD that he or she had been able to compensate for in the
past. It is then that ADHD can and should be diagnosed. Indeed, adult-onset
ADHD is a recognized condition in the big book of psychiatric disorders, the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-5).
Others believe that ADHD is largely a drug company fabrication designed
to serve and validate the latest pharmaceutical product. It’s not, though surely
over the years snake oil salesmen have contributed to a misunderstanding of
how and why some medications really do work.
Still others—even less charitably—think ADHD is a fancy term for
laziness and that people who “have it” need some good old-fashioned
discipline! In fact, “laziness” is a word about as far from accurate as it could
be. The mind of someone with ADHD is in fact constantly at work. Our
productivity may not always show it, but this is not because of a lack of intent
or energy!
The overarching mistake too many people make about ADHD is to think
of this mountain of a condition as a molehill of a problem for a rare few. Big
mistake.

be. The mind of someone with ADHD is in fact constantly at work. Our
productivity may not always show it, but this is not because of a lack of intent
or energy!
The overarching mistake too many people make about ADHD is to think
of this mountain of a condition as a molehill of a problem for a rare few. Big
mistake.

First of all, it’s not rare. It occurs in at least 5 percent of the population,
though we believe that that number is much higher because there are people
who seem to be doing well in life (but who could be doing so much better)
who do not get diagnosed. The relative paucity of professionals who know
how to diagnose ADHD also skews the numbers. And because of our
lightning-fast access to information and the rapid-fire nature of incoming
stimuli—images, sounds, and data everywhere—it’s also probable that all of
us are indeed “a little ADHD” nowadays: more scatterbrained, forgetful, and
unfocused than ever before. We actually have a new term to describe this
modern erraticism, and we will get to that in chapter 1.
Ignorance regarding ADHD costs lives. Literally. ADHD can be a
scourge, an unremitting, lifelong ordeal, the reason a brilliant person never
finds success but rather limps through life in frustration, shame, and failure,
amid catcalls to try harder, get with the program, grow up, or in some other
way reform. It can lead to suicide, addictions of all kinds, felonious acts (the
prisons are full of people with undiagnosed ADHD), dangerously violent
behavior, and a shorter life.
The psychologist Russell Barkley, one of the top authorities in the field,
sums up the danger in stark statistics:
Compared to other killers from a public health standpoint, ADHD is
bad. Smoking, for example, reduces life expectancy by 2.4 years, and
if you smoke more than 20 cigarettes a day you’re down about 6.5
years. For diabetes and obesity it’s a couple of years. For elevated
blood cholesterol, it’s 9 months. ADHD is worse than the top 5 killers
in the U.S. combined.
Having ADHD costs a person nearly thirteen years of life, on average.
Barkley adds,
And that’s on top of all the findings of a greater risk for accidental
injury and suicide….About two-thirds of people with ADHD have a
life expectancy reduced by up to 21 years.

Knowing what we now know about ADHD and based on the most recent
research, we can categorically and confidently say this: It does not have to be
this way! It’s time to bring true “2.0 thinking” to the fore.
For starters, medication really can help. As Dr. Barkley himself went on
to say,
ADHD is the most treatable disorder in psychiatry, bar none. We have
more medications with…larger effect sizes, greater response rates, and
more delivery systems that change people’s lives more than any other
disorder. They’re some of the safest medications in psychiatry.
Beyond the medicine cabinet (or in combination with it), we now also
know there is an arsenal of behavioral and lifestyle strategies you or someone
you care about can use to manage ADHD—from the calming and focusing
power of exercise to several ways to harness the lively, ever-active
imagination of someone with ADHD and assessments for “finding the right
kind of difficult,” the work or activity that is best suited to a mind that needs
to be active.
As clinicians ourselves, we have seen each of these strategies work for
and change the lives of our patients, some of whom we describe in these

imagination of someone with ADHD and assessments for “finding the right
kind of difficult,” the work or activity that is best suited to a mind that needs
to be active.
As clinicians ourselves, we have seen each of these strategies work for
and change the lives of our patients, some of whom we describe in these
pages (with pseudonyms to protect privacy). Through the incredible advances
in brain scan technology and the avid interest of many neuropsychiatric
researchers, we also have an increasingly clear picture of why these strategies
work; chapters 2 and 3 delve into that fascinating explanation to give you a
baseline understanding of the ADHD brain, informing all the rest.
But before we get to the what-to-do portion of our program, it’s important
to go back to a word we used above: power. Yes, ADHD is a powerful force
of pain and needless suffering in too many lives. But if mastered, it brings out
talents you can neither teach nor buy. It is often the lifeblood of creativity and
artistic talents. It is a driver of ingenuity and iterative thinking. It can be your
special strength or your child’s, even a bona fide superpower. If you really
understand it and make it your own, ADHD can become the springboard to
success beyond what you ever imagined and can be the key that unlocks your
potential. As we’ve said, we see this in our practices every day.

We often explain ADHD to children using a very simple analogy that
certainly resonates with adults, too: A person with ADHD has the power of a
Ferrari engine but with bicycle-strength brakes. It’s the mismatch of engine
power to braking capability that causes the problems. Strengthening one’s
brakes is the name of the game.
In short, ADHD can be a uniquely powerful asset, a gift, if managed with
understanding. The operative phrase here, of course, is “with understanding.”
Depending on whether we understand ADHD, we can feel bad or good about
the ways in which having it makes us feel and act differently from others. One
of the chief reasons for writing this book is to help you, or someone you care
about, be one of the people who is different and feels darn good about it. If
you know who you are, it becomes easier to like who you are. “Knowledge is
power” has never been a more apt cliché. Join us on the journey through the
very latest understanding of this mercurial condition.

W

CHAPTER 1
A Spectrum of Traits
ho are we, the people who have ADHD?
We are the problem kid who drives his parents crazy by being totally
disorganized, unable to follow through on anything, incapable of cleaning up
a room, or washing dishes, or performing just about any assigned task; the
one who is forever interrupting, making excuses for work not done, and
generally functioning far below potential in most areas. We are the kid who
gets daily lectures on how we’re squandering our talent, wasting the golden
opportunity that our innate ability gives us to do well, and failing to make
good use of all that our parents have provided.
We are also sometimes the talented executive who keeps falling short due
to missed deadlines, forgotten obligations, social faux pas, and blown
opportunities. Too often we are the addicts, the misfits, the unemployed, and
the criminals who are just one diagnosis and treatment plan away from
turning it all around. We are the people Marlon Brando spoke for in the
classic 1954 film On the Waterfront when he said, “I coulda been a
contender.” So many of us coulda been contenders, and shoulda been for
sure.
But then, we can also make good. Can we ever! We are the seemingly
tuned-out meeting participant who comes out of nowhere to provide the fresh

idea that saves the day. Frequently, we are the “underachieving” child whose
talent blooms with the right kind of help and finds incredible success after a
checkered educational record. We are the contenders and the winners.
We are also imaginative and dynamic teachers, preachers, circus clowns,
and stand-up comics, Navy SEALs or Army Rangers, inventors, tinkerers,
and trend setters. Among us there are self-made millionaires and billionaires;
Pulitzer and Nobel prize winners; Academy, Tony, Emmy, and Grammy
award winners; topflight trial attorneys, brain surgeons, traders on the
commodities exchange, and investment bankers. And we are often
entrepreneurs. We are entrepreneurs ourselves, and the great majority of the
adult patients we see for ADHD are or aspire to be entrepreneurs too. The
owner and operator of an entrepreneurial support company called Strategic
Coach, a man named Dan Sullivan (who also has ADHD!), estimates that at
least 50 percent of his clients have ADHD as well.
Because people with ADHD don’t look any different from everyone else,
our condition is invisible. But if you were to climb up into our heads, you’d
discover quite a different landscape. You’d find ideas firing around like
kernels in a popcorn machine: ideas coming rat-a-tat fast, and on no
discernable schedule. Ideas coming in spontaneous, erratic bursts. And
because we can’t turn this particular popcorn machine off, we are often
unable to stop the idea generation at night; our minds never seem to rest.
Indeed, our minds are here and there and everywhere—all at once—
which sometimes manifests as appearing to be somewhere else, in some
dreamy state. And that means we often miss the proverbial (or literal!) boat.
But then maybe we build an airplane or grab a pogo stick instead. We tune
out in the middle of a job interview and don’t get the job, but perhaps we see
a poster hanging in the human resources waiting room that sparks a new idea
that leads us to a patented invention. We offend people by forgetting names
and promises, but we make good by understanding what nobody else has
picked up on. We shoot ourselves in the foot, only, on the spot, to devise a

out in the middle of a job interview and don’t get the job, but perhaps we see
a poster hanging in the human resources waiting room that sparks a new idea
that leads us to a patented invention. We offend people by forgetting names
and promises, but we make good by understanding what nobody else has
picked up on. We shoot ourselves in the foot, only, on the spot, to devise a
painless method to remove the bullet. The great mathematician Alan Turing
summed us up when he said, “Sometimes it is the people no one can imagine
anything of who do the things no one can imagine.” That sums us up
perfectly.

Which is to say that ADHD is a far richer, more complicated,
paradoxical, dangerous, but also potentially advantageous state of being than
the oversimplified version most of the general public takes it to be or than
even the detailed diagnostic criteria would have you believe. “ADHD” is a
term that describes a way of being in the world. It is neither entirely a
disorder nor entirely an asset. It is an array of traits specific to a unique kind
of mind. It can become a distinct advantage or an abiding curse, depending
on how a person manages it.
THE LUNATIC, THE LOVER, AND THE POET
As different as ADHD can be from person to person, there are several
qualities that seem nearly universal to people with it. Distractibility,
impulsivity, and hyperactivity are the classic descriptors, but they find what
we think are richer and more apt counterparts in Shakespeare’s musing about
“the lunatic, the lover, and the poet.”
Having ADHD doesn’t mean you’re crazy, so admittedly “lunatic” may be
too strong a word. But risk taking and irrational thinking go hand in hand
with ADHD behavior. We like irrational. We’re at home in uncertainty. We’re
at ease where others are anxious. We’re relaxed not knowing where we are or
what direction we’re headed in. A common lament we hear from parents of
teens with ADHD makes the point: “What was he thinking? He must have
lost his mind!” Likewise the spouse who asks us, “Why does he keep doing
the same stupid thing over and over again? Isn’t that the definition of
insanity?”
Some people call this being a nonconformist, but that term misses the
point. We don’t choose not to conform. We don’t even notice what the
standard we’re not conforming to is!
People with ADHD are lovers in the sense that they tend to have
unbridled optimism. We never met a deal we didn’t like, an opportunity we
didn’t want to pursue, a chance we didn’t want to take. We get carried away.
We see limitless possibilities where others see just the limits. The lover has

trouble holding back, and not holding back is a major part of what it means to
have ADHD.
Being a poet might best be defined with another trio of descriptors:
creative, dreamy, and sometimes brooding.
“Creativity,” as we use the term in connection with ADHD, designates an
innate ability, desire, and irrepressible urge to plunge one’s imagination
regularly and deeply into life—into a project, an idea, a piece of music, a
sandcastle. Indeed, people with ADHD feel an abiding need—an omnipresent
itch—to create something. It’s with us all the time, this unnamed appetite,
whether we understand what it is or not; the act of creation offers the
magnet’s north pole to our south and clicks us together. It captivates us, plants
us in the present, and sets us transfixed within the creative act, whatever it
might happen to be.

itch—to create something. It’s with us all the time, this unnamed appetite,
whether we understand what it is or not; the act of creation offers the
magnet’s north pole to our south and clicks us together. It captivates us, plants
us in the present, and sets us transfixed within the creative act, whatever it
might happen to be.
Even awake we’re dreaming, always creating, always searching for some
mud pie to turn into pumpkin apple chiffon. Our imagination fuels our
curiosity to find out what that noise was, or what was under the rock, or why
the petri dish looks different from when we left it. If we weren’t so dreamy
and curious we could stay on track and never get distracted. But we do
investigate the noise, the soil, the petri dish. This is why the word “deficit” in
the name of our condition is such a misnomer. In fact, we do not suffer from a
deficit of attention. Just the opposite. We’ve got an overabundance of
attention, more attention than we can cope with; our constant challenge is to
control it.
As for brooding, this is the special blessing and the bitter curse of
ADHD. You have a vision. Maybe you’ve come up with a novel technology
for making an unbeatable knife sharpener. Or maybe you think you have the
plot to the perfect novel. Whatever your vision, you go at it like you never
have before.
But then, what you’ve created…disappoints. It’s not just disappointing,
but suddenly you feel it’s terrible, awful, the worst ever, and you plunge into
despair. Then, just as unexpectedly, out of nowhere the vision comes back.
You get reinspired. You can see it, you want it, you can’t resist. You have to
try again. Off you go—dreaming and creating and probably brooding again
too.

Like all three characters—the lunatic, the lover, and the poet—we have a
pronounced intolerance of boredom; boredom is our kryptonite. The second
that we experience boredom—which you might think of as a lack of
stimulation—we reflexively, instantaneously, automatically and without
conscious thought seek stimulation. We don’t care what it is, we just have to
address the mental emergency—the brain pain—that boredom sets off. Like
mental EMTs, we swing into action. We might pick a fight to create a bit of
stimulation; we might go shopping online with manic abandon; we might rob
a bank; we might snort cocaine—or we might invent the best widget the
world has ever seen or come up with the solution to what’s keeping our
business from taking off.
PARADOXICAL TENDENCIES
We have printed the formal diagnostic definition of ADHD on page 137 so
that you can see what your psychiatrist or evaluator is talking about when
throwing around the diagnosis, but in less clinical terms, it helps to think of
ADHD as a complex set of contradictory or paradoxical tendencies: a lack of
focus combined with an ability to superfocus; a lack of direction combined
with highly directed entrepreneurialism; a tendency to procrastinate combined
with a knack for getting a week’s worth of work done in two hours; impulsive,
wrongheaded decision making combined with inventive, out-of-the-blue
problem solving; interpersonal cluelessness combined with uncanny intuition
and empathy; the list goes on.
Here, more formally, are the telltale signs of ADHD that might send you
looking for clinical confirmation:
Unexplained underachievement. The person is simply not doing as well as
innate talent and brainpower warrant. There’s no obvious explanation, like

problem solving; interpersonal cluelessness combined with uncanny intuition
and empathy; the list goes on.
Here, more formally, are the telltale signs of ADHD that might send you
looking for clinical confirmation:
Unexplained underachievement. The person is simply not doing as well as
innate talent and brainpower warrant. There’s no obvious explanation, like
poor eyesight, serious physical illness, or cognitive impairment due to
head injury, say.
A wandering mind. You’ll get frequent comments from teachers, or, in an
adult, supervisors or spouse, that the individual’s mind wanders, that he or

she has trouble focusing and staying on task, that performance is
inconsistent, good days and bad days, good moments and terrible ones, all
of which usually lead the teacher, supervisor, or spouse to conclude that
the person in question needs more discipline, needs to try harder, needs to
learn to pay attention. No kidding! But such is the ignorance that still
surrounds ADHD that people continue to cite lack of effort as the cause
of the disorganization and poor attention. The biological fact is that, in the
absence of stimulation, they can’t. Not won’t. Can’t.
Trouble organizing and planning. In the clinical jargon, this is called trouble
with “executive function.” The child, say, has trouble getting dressed in
the morning. You can ask your daughter to go upstairs and get dressed
only to find her fifteen minutes later still in her nightclothes, lying on her
bed engrossed in a conversation with her doll. Or you can ask your
husband to take out the trash and in the time it takes him to walk over to
the trash container, he forgets what he’s supposed to be doing and slowly
ambles right past it. You go ballistic, believing your husband is being
blatantly provocative, passive-aggressive, oppositional, or colossally self-
centered, all adjectives you’ve applied to him hundreds of times in the
past. Before you get divorced, it would be marriage-saving if someone
could explain to you both that walking past the trash, like hundreds of
other acts of seemingly selfish disregard for others, stems not from
selfishness or another character defect but from a neurological condition
that renders attention inconsistent and immediate memory so porous that
a task can be forgotten in a heartbeat. What compounds these problems,
and makes some people doubt the validity of the diagnosis, is that these
same people can hyperfocus, deliver a brilliant presentation on time, and
be super-reliable when they are stimulated. But, as we’ve said, boredom is
kryptonite; the ADHD mind recoils from boredom, disappearing into a
fervent search for stimulation while the trash can sits forlornly unemptied.
High degree of creativity and imagination. People with ADHD—at any age
—often possess intellectual effervescence. Unfortunately, this natural
sparkle can be snuffed out by years of criticism, reprimands, redirection,
lack of appreciation, and repeated disappointments, frustrations, and
outright failures.

High degree of creativity and imagination. People with ADHD—at any age
—often possess intellectual effervescence. Unfortunately, this natural
sparkle can be snuffed out by years of criticism, reprimands, redirection,
lack of appreciation, and repeated disappointments, frustrations, and
outright failures.

Trouble with time management, and a tendency to procrastinate. This is
another element of executive function, and quite an interesting one. Those
of us who have ADHD experience time differently from other people.
This is really hard for most people to believe, which is why people are
typically unsympathetic to our problem and ascribe it to lack of effort, a
bad attitude, or pure obstinacy. But the fact is that we lack an internal
sense of the arc of time; we’re unaware of the unstoppable flow of
seconds into minutes into hours, days, and so forth. Defying the laws of
physics, we change the nature of time in our minds. In our world, we have
little awareness of the seconds ticking by; few internal alerts, alarms, or
cues; no judicious allocation of chunks of time for this, then that, and
then the next thing. We short-circuit all such complexity by slicing time
down to its barest bones. In our world, we recognize only two times:
“now” and “not now.” We hear “We have to leave in a half hour” as “We
don’t have to leave now.” “The paper is due in five days” becomes “It’s not
due now,” and the five days might as well be five months. We hear “I’ll
have to go to bed sometime” when someone has actually said “It’s time
for bed now.” Our truncated sense of time leads to all manner of fights,
failures, job losses, disappointed friends, and failed romances, but at the
same time to an uncanny ability to work brilliantly under extreme
pressure, as well as to be wonderfully, infuriatingly oblivious to the time
pressures that stress most people to the max.
Strong will, stubbornness, refusal of help. It can seem stunningly stupid, but
many people with ADHD, especially men, state outright, “I’d rather fail
doing it my way than succeed with help.”
Generosity. As painful as the distortions we carry around can be, we also
carry around a pocketful of miracles, a positive energy that comes and
goes. But when it comes, we are the most generous people you’ll ever find,
the most optimistic, the most enthusiastic. Yes, ironically, although we
tend to reject help from others (see above!), we are the ones who offer the
shirt off our back to the person who needs it, whether we know them or
not. It’s why so many of us excel in sales. We can be charismatic,
infectiously funny, persuasive, and just what you need if you’re feeling
low.

Restlessness, especially in boys and men. Woolgathering, especially in girls
and women. Because they tend not to be hyperactive or disruptive,
females of all ages remain the most undiagnosed group. You have to be a
savvy parent, teacher, spouse, supervisor, or doctor to pick up inattentive,
non-hyperactive ADHD in a girl or woman.
Unique and active sense of humor. Quirky, offbeat, but usually rather
sophisticated too. Many stand-up comics and comedy writers have
ADHD, perhaps in part because of our fundamentally different ways of
seeing the world. We live outside the proverbial box. In fact, one of us
probably invented the psychological test that the phrase “thinking outside
the box” comes from.
Trouble sharing and playing with others early on, but at the same time, a

ADHD, perhaps in part because of our fundamentally different ways of
seeing the world. We live outside the proverbial box. In fact, one of us
probably invented the psychological test that the phrase “thinking outside
the box” comes from.
Trouble sharing and playing with others early on, but at the same time, a
desire to make friends. As life progresses, social problems can develop,
due to trouble reading the social scene and inability to control the impulse
to interrupt or butt in. In adulthood, this translates to seeming gruff,
awkward, rude, self-centered, unfiltered, or aloof; but it is really just the
undiagnosed and untreated ADHD that is causing the problems. This is
why we call ADHD such a “good news” diagnosis: Once you know you
have it, and you find the right help, life can only get better, often much
better.
Exquisite sensitivity to criticism or rejection. William Dodson, one of the
smartest clinicians ever to write about ADHD, made famous the term
“rejection-sensitive dysphoria,” or RSD, which describes a tendency on
the part of people who have ADHD to overreact precipitously and
disastrously to even the slightest perceived put-down, dis, or vaguely
negative remark. They can spiral down to the depths in the blink of an eye
and become inconsolable. On the other hand (there’s always an other hand
in this syndrome so characterized by pairs of opposite symptoms), we’ve
coined another term to describe the opposite of RSD. It is “recognition-
sensitive euphoria,” or RSE, which refers to our enhanced ability to make
constructive use of praise, affirmation, and encouragement. As much as
we can get down in the dumps over a minute criticism, we can fly high
and put to great use even small bits of encouragement or recognition.
Impulsiveness and impatience. We make quick decisions and have trouble
delaying gratification. We flunk the marshmallow test.
*1 
We tend to

operate on a “fire, aim, ready” basis instead of “ready, aim, fire.” But
remember, the flip side of impulsivity is creativity. Creativity is
impulsivity gone right. You do not plan to have a creative idea, a eureka
moment, a sudden revelation. These all come without bidding or warning.
They come to us impulsively.
An itch to change the conditions of life. As you get older, this tends to
manifest as a general dissatisfaction with ordinary life leading to a need to
improve upon it, augment it, supercharge it, ratchet it up several notches.
This “itch” can lead to major achievements and creations, or it can lead to
addictions of all kinds as well as a host of other dangerous behaviors.
Often it leads to both.
High energy (hence the use of “hyperactivity” in the disorder name), coupled
with a tendency toward lassitude, often mistaken for laziness.
Uncannily accurate intuition, coupled with a tendency to overlook the
obvious and ignore major data.
Transparency, to the point of being honest to a fault. The person who is
incapable of “kissing up,” intolerant of hypocrisy, often tactless,
politically incorrect, and heedless of repercussions and consequences…is
often dealing with ADHD. On the other hand, especially in children, this
translates into a tendency to lie impulsively when put on the spot. This is
not a character defect or a lack of conscience, which we see in a
sociopath, but rather a reflexive attempt to change reality, as in wishing it
were so.
Susceptibility to addictions and compulsive behaviors of all kinds. From

translates into a tendency to lie impulsively when put on the spot. This is
not a character defect or a lack of conscience, which we see in a
sociopath, but rather a reflexive attempt to change reality, as in wishing it
were so.
Susceptibility to addictions and compulsive behaviors of all kinds. From
drugs and alcohol, to gambling, shopping, spending, sex, food, exercise,
and screens, we who have ADHD are five to ten times more likely than
the person who does not have ADHD to develop a problem in this
domain. This stems from the “itch” mentioned earlier and the need to
juice up reality. The upside of this symptom is that if you find the right
creative outlet—start a business, write a book, build a house, plant a
garden—you can scratch the itch that way, rather than develop a bad habit
or an outright addiction.
Having a metaphorical lightning rod and weather vane. For whatever
reason, people with ADHD often are lightning rods for whatever can go
wrong: being the one kid caught with weed when twenty others had it; the

adult or kid who gets scapegoated, blamed, and disciplined more than
anyone else; the one who disrupts the family event, or business meeting,
or class discussion without meaning to. But at the same time, the lightning
rod quality can lead the person with ADHD to receive ideas, energies,
premonitions, and images from who knows where that lead to amazing
success. Similarly, the internal, inborn weather vane leads the person with
ADHD to be the first to sense a shift in mood or energy in the group, the
class, the family, the organization, the town, the country. Before others
catch on, the person with ADHD is telling others to watch out, there’s an
ill wind brewing; or to get ready, a big opportunity is just around the
corner. Like the lightning rod, the weather vane effect can’t be explained
on any scientific basis we know of, but we see it in our patients, of all
ages, all the time.
Tendency to externalize or blame others while not seeing your role in the
problem. This is coupled with a general inability to observe oneself
accurately, which naturally leads to more externalizing, since you truly do
not see the role you play in the problem.
Distorted negative self-image. Due to the inability to observe oneself
accurately, coupled with the heightened sensitivity to perceived criticism
and a record of underachievement, people with ADHD usually have a
self-image that is far more negative than is warranted. One of our patients
calls the condition “attention deficit distorter” because of how it distorts
so many perceptions of reality. While on the one hand, creativity depends
upon the ability to imagine a different reality, to “distort” the ordinary
into something better, on the other hand, this “distorter” can create one of
the most painful aspects of ADHD, which is very low self-regard. We
look at ourselves as if in a house of mirrors, not seeing ourselves as others
do, seeing only what we regard as failures and shortcomings, all but blind
to the upside, which is typically considerable. We suffer shame as we
misread ourselves and misread others’ responses to us. We hold back on
opportunities and relationships out of that shame, as well as fear and
misunderstanding.
BIOLOGICAL OR CULTURALLY INDUCED ADHD?

do, seeing only what we regard as failures and shortcomings, all but blind
to the upside, which is typically considerable. We suffer shame as we
misread ourselves and misread others’ responses to us. We hold back on
opportunities and relationships out of that shame, as well as fear and
misunderstanding.
BIOLOGICAL OR CULTURALLY INDUCED ADHD?

Scientific estimates suggest that between 5 and 10 percent of people are born
with some combination of the characteristics we have just listed. This number
represents those of us born with ADHD. As such, it is actually recognized as
one of the most heritable conditions in the behavioral sciences. “Heritable”
means you inherit a collection of genes that increase the likelihood that you
will develop a condition during your lifetime. Though it might be helpful to
be able to identify just which genes are involved in ADHD, the reality is that
there is no one or two genes for ADHD but an array, which makes sense,
given that ADHD is a coat of so many colors.
If one parent has ADHD, the risk is one in three that a given child will
have ADHD. If both parents have ADHD, the risk is two in three for a given
child. However, those are just averages. In Dr. Hallowell’s family, for
example, he has ADHD, his wife does not, but all three of their children have
it.
In addition to genetics, we’ve also known for a long time that certain
environmental stressors can cause ADHD, most notably head injuries or lack
of oxygen at birth, early infections, or any other brain insult. (A “brain
insult,” by the way, is not someone telling you that you have an ugly brain, but
your brain’s function being in some way interfered with such as by fever,
toxins like lead or mercury, or trauma.)
We’ve also known that a mother’s being obese or drinking alcohol, using
drugs, or smoking cigarettes during pregnancy can raise the risk of the baby’s
developing ADHD. Still unproven, but being studied vis-à-vis neurological
functioning, is another risk factor we might add to the list: magnetic field non-
ionizing radiation (MFR), which comes in two forms, low frequency and high
frequency. Low frequency MFR comes from, among other sources, power
lines and kitchen appliances. High frequency MFR, the newer one, comes
from wireless networks and cellphones. Stay tuned…
—
Beyond the sources of biologically based ADHD, there are a lot of people
who act as if they have ADHD but on close inspection turn out not to have
the diagnosable condition. These are the people who have ADHD-like
symptoms caused by the conditions of modern life. Their “ADHD” is a

response to the massive increase in stimuli that now bombard our brains and
our world.
The massive behavioral conditioning we’ve all been undergoing since the
advent of ubiquitous electronic communications technology has changed us
radically. But this dramatic, if not epochal, change is underappreciated. It’s
underappreciated because we’re living in it as it happens, like frogs in cold
water that slowly gets heated up without the frogs trying to jump out, until
they’re boiled. Our world has been getting heated up big-time. And while we
could jump out, it’s pretty difficult to do so and still function in the modern
world. Modern life has trained our brains to go faster and faster, to do more
and more, to receive and transmit 24/7, and to require constant stimulation—
be it from movies, TV, conversation, even news, as well as the minute-to-

could jump out, it’s pretty difficult to do so and still function in the modern
world. Modern life has trained our brains to go faster and faster, to do more
and more, to receive and transmit 24/7, and to require constant stimulation—
be it from movies, TV, conversation, even news, as well as the minute-to-
minute living of our lives. Most of us can go no more than a few seconds
without looking for a screen.
Modern life compels these changes by forcing our brains to process
exponentially more data points than ever before in human history,
dramatically more than we did prior to the era of the Internet, smartphones,
and social media. The hardwiring of our brains has not changed—as far as we
know, although some experts do suspect that our hardwiring is changing—but
in our efforts to adapt to the speeding up of life and the projectile spewing of
data splattering onto our brains all the time, we’ve had to develop new, often
rather antisocial habits in order to cope. These habits have come together to
create something we now call VAST: the variable attention stimulus trait.
*2
Whether you have true ADHD or its environmentally induced cousin,
VAST, it’s important to detoxify the label and focus on the inherent positives.
To be clear, we don’t want you to deny there is a downside to what you are
going through, but we want you also to identify the upside.
In the descriptors we offer for VAST below, you will see there is no
requirement for impairment, because we are not designating this as a
disorder, but as a trait. You will note there is also mention of many strengths.
And unlike a formal ADHD diagnosis, for which six out of nine criteria on
the axis of inattention or the axis of hyperactivity and impulsivity need to be
present (see appendix A for a full listing of these symptoms), there is no set
number of descriptors to qualify for the diagnosis, or what we prefer to call
the “description” or “self-portrait.”

In fact, the diagnostic criteria for ADHD found in DSM-5, the official
diagnostic manual, have inadvertently created a lot of confusion. People often
ask, “Do I have ADD or ADHD?” Technically, there is no longer any such
thing as ADD. You can only have ADHD. But there are qualifiers. If you
have at least six out of nine symptoms on the axis of inattention, but not on
the axis of hyperactivity and impulsivity, then you have ADHD,
predominantly inattentive. This is what used to be called ADD. If you have six
out of nine symptoms on both axes, then you have ADHD, combined type.
And if you are one of the extremely rare people who has symptoms only on
the axis of hyperactivity and impulsivity, then you have ADHD,
predominantly hyperactive-impulsive.
For the variable attention stimulus trait, we do not call what we offer
below “diagnostic criteria” at all. Instead, if you see yourself in the following
list of descriptors enough that they describe you and set you apart from
others, well, then, VAST fits you, and what we have to say about how to live
best with this trait may be useful to you.
Last, in the chart we have created in the pages that follow, you’ll quickly
see that there is an opposite word to each descriptor. That’s because, like
ADHD, VAST is a condition of paradoxical pairs, ups and downs, lefts and
rights. That’s why living with it can be such a mishmash, so confusing, but
also so exciting and at times groundbreaking. (You’ll also note that there is a

see that there is an opposite word to each descriptor. That’s because, like
ADHD, VAST is a condition of paradoxical pairs, ups and downs, lefts and
rights. That’s why living with it can be such a mishmash, so confusing, but
also so exciting and at times groundbreaking. (You’ll also note that there is a
lot of overlap among the twenty descriptors of ADHD.)
USEFUL PROBLEMATIC
Passionate; zealous; idealistic; will
sacrifice everything for a cause or a
friend
Can become rigid in the service of a
cause; can become fanatical, strident,
irrational; Captain Ahab syndrome
Meticulous at times, especially on
projects that matter a great deal
Usually disorganized, even chaotically so;
chaos can rule to such an extent that
school, job, marriage hang in balance
Can get a lot done in a short amount of
time
Fundamentally different sense of time;
there is only NOW and NOT NOW in this
world, so procrastination rules, and
things rarely get done on time
An appreciation of the offbeat, unusual,
unconventional
An inability or refusal to conform or get in
line when doing so is obviously in his or
her best interest

Dreamer par excellence; visionary; lives
on wings of imagination, flights of fancy
Sometimes so bored by reality that he or
she ignores it and gets into trouble for
having done so
Honest to a fault; will say what others
don’t dare to say; outspoken; blunt
Can hurt feelings and damage self; can
unwittingly be cruel, which is last thing
he or she wants to be
Intense desire to be free and
independent, own boss; master of own
fate
Trouble working on teams; trouble taking
orders; trouble with intimacy in private
life
Naturally creative; ideas pop all the time
like in a popcorn machine
Trouble organizing all the ideas and doing
something productive with them
Naturally curious; always wanting to
know who, what, where, why, and how;
never satisfied until he or she gets the
answer
Easily distracted by novelty or any puzzle,
conundrum, unsolved problem, or
beguiling opportunity, however irrelevant
it may be
Enormously energetic; seemingly
indefatigable
Impulsive; can’t sit still or linger over a
conversation or ponder an idea with a
colleague or a relative
Mind like a steel trap; can remember
details from years ago
Forgets what he or she went into the next
room to get; forgets where he or she put
car keys; forgets wallet, glasses,
umbrella; leaves groceries on roof of car
and drives off
Full of ideas So many ideas they choke the growth of
any single one
Decisive; can make an important,
complex decision in a split second
Impatient; hates to wrestle with
ambiguity; shoots from the hip
Initial surge of excitement over new plan,
deal, idea, project, relationship
Excitement peters out in the middle
phase; trouble sustaining interest
Takes responsibility; gets done what
needs to get done
Trouble delegating, trusting that others
can do it as well as he or she can
Tenacious; never gives up; will literally
collapse before quitting
Stubborn; would rather fail doing it his or
her way than succeed taking advice from
someone else; can spend a lifetime trying
to get good at what he or she’s bad at
Can act on the spur of the moment Procrastination can be a huge problem
Original; sees solutions others do not;
comes up with novel ideas
Can seem whacky, eccentric, even crazy;
can put people off by being too offbeat
and arrogant
Confident; self-assured Insecure; despite confident exterior feels

to get good at what he or she’s bad at
Can act on the spur of the moment Procrastination can be a huge problem
Original; sees solutions others do not;
comes up with novel ideas
Can seem whacky, eccentric, even crazy;
can put people off by being too offbeat
and arrogant
Confident; self-assured Insecure; despite confident exterior feels
success was all done by smoke and

mirrors
Extremely hardworking Driven; compulsive; can’t let up;
maniacal
Lightning-quick mind Trouble shutting mind down; risk of
developing addictions to quiet mind
down
Risk taker; focuses and performs best in
situations of crisis and danger
Needs danger in order to feel engaged
with life and truly alive
Sees the big picture before anyone else Trouble with implementation and
sweating the details
Generous; bighearted; willing to give with
no expectation of return
Can give away the store
Funny; the life of the party; can connect
with everyone
Secretly lonely; feels no one really knows
him
Innovator Can’t/won’t follow instructions
Pays close attention when interested Easily distracted; mind wanders when not
interested; frequently on electronic
devices and difficult to engage
Supremely talented in several domains Seriously limited in several domains
A life enthusiast; wants to try everything;
can’t ever get enough
Overcommitted; about to snap
Strong leader; charismatic Hates the position of leader; worries he
or she will let everyone down; unaware of
his or her own charisma
Thrives in highly stimulating situations Finds contentment too bland and so can
disrupt ordinary happiness in order to
create high stimulation
Loves debate, conflict, sparring Intimacy can be difficult unless partner
likes these as well
S N
*1 In 1972, the Stanford psychologist Walter Mischel devised an experiment using
marshmallows to test a child’s ability to delay gratification.
*2 Carrie Feibel, health editor at KQED in San Francisco, suggested the phrase and acronym
to us. We liked it so much that we adopted it, with her permission.

I

CHAPTER 2
Understanding the Demon of the
Mind
magine a man named Hank. Hank is a natural-born salesman, good with
people, a good judge of character.
But Hank is also tortured, and that’s not too strong a word for the mental
miseries he endures. He spends chunks of time—fifteen minutes here, an
hour there, sometimes an entire Saturday morning and even longer—
brooding. Troubling, jagged thoughts, images, ideas, and feelings pop up
unimpeded in his mind like rocks in a river’s current as he desperately tries to
steady his mental raft. They keep on coming, smashing against his mind over
and over while he bravely tries to survive another trip down the relentlessly
moving rapids within.
Fixed in place by the torrent of his negative thoughts, Hank sits in the
easy chair in his living room, feet on the floor, fingers digging into the arms
of his chair, staring out the window at a sunny afternoon. Of course he does
see what’s actually outside—an elm tree in the foreground, the street beyond
—but he can’t really take in the view. All he sees is danger and more
metaphorical rocks to get past.

This horrible ruminative process is as much a routine part of Hank’s life
as brushing his teeth or commuting to work. Only it lasts longer and it
produces only pain, no gain.
Now forty years old, Hank is underachieving at work, not because he
lacks talent—he has talent coming out his ears, as his boss said—but because
he “just can’t get his act together,” to quote his exasperated wife.
Hank is more exasperated than anyone, which only fuels his incessant
self-recrimination. He’s tried antidepressants, which did nothing but reduce
his libido, diminishing one of the few pleasures in his life. He’s tried
psychotherapy, which ironically caused him guilt because he felt he was
frustrating the psychologist and making the psychologist feel incompetent.
“It’s not your fault, doc,” he said in their final meeting, the one in which Hank
declared himself incurable. “I’m just wired differently. I’ve got the devil of a
dark side. I might as well get used to it.”
Like many people, Hank experiences excessive worry. But because he
also has ADHD, his worry has been magnified. Ironically for a condition
commonly associated with lack of focus, many people with ADHD—or with
the VAST characteristics—focus on their worry so much that it wears a rut in
their thinking. And like a rut in the road, it can be hard to avoid. Fortunately,
we now know how these ruts get made and how to steer the mind out of
them.
NEW FINDINGS, NEW HELP
Enter one of our world’s greatest triumphs of the past thirty years: advances
in brain science. After millennia of moral (It’s all a matter of willpower; suck
it up); religious (Give your suffering up to God or “Whate’er He gives, He gives
the best”); or philosophical (Control what you can, accept what you can’t)
explanations and remedies for mental anguish, we now live in an era when we
can assess the actual substrate in which the action occurs, namely, your brain
and its attendant nervous system.
We can now measure the many molecules in the brain; the electrical
activity; the flow of blood; the differential consumption of glucose (energy)

explanations and remedies for mental anguish, we now live in an era when we
can assess the actual substrate in which the action occurs, namely, your brain
and its attendant nervous system.
We can now measure the many molecules in the brain; the electrical
activity; the flow of blood; the differential consumption of glucose (energy)

and oxygen; and the actual size of various regions of the brain and correlate
the size with the function of that area. We’re starting to understand the
genetics behind brain function, as well as the epigenetics, the varying impact
of environment upon the expression of genes.
For example, it is because of epigenetics that you may have been born
with genes that predispose you to depression, but because of loving parents
and a nurturing school system, those genes never get expressed. You go
through life never suffering from depression, even though you carry the genes
that might have led you there. On the other hand, if you had unloving parents,
if you never received nurturing and positive connections, or, worse, if you
suffered trauma and abuse, then if you also inherited the genes that
predispose you to depression or other pathology, those genes are far more
likely to get expressed. Regardless of the trait, condition, disorder, or disease,
nature versus nurture always comes down to both. Good nurture can
dramatically reduce the influence of bad nature, bad genes; unfortunately, the
reverse is also true: bad nurture, like cold or distant parents, ongoing conflict,
or outright trauma while growing up, can suppress good nature, good genes.
The science of epigenetics has helped prove the brain’s wondrous ability
to change over the course of your lifetime. Called neuroplasticity, this is one
of the major discoveries in neuroscience in the past generation. People used
to believe that the brain was more or less set by a certain age—let’s say thirty
—and after that the die was cast, the brain was set.
This fixed-brain notion begat a host of homespun clichés and conventional
wisdom to the effect that you simply cannot teach an old dog, or even a
middle-aged dog, new tricks; that from age thirty the leopard does not change
its spots, that you are who you are and you better get used to it because no
amount of therapy, life experience, or other magic can make a significant dent
in the architecture of your brain or your personality, except by changing it for
the worse, through disease, stroke, cancer, poisons, alcohol, drugs, or
dementia.
Wrong. As with much homespun wisdom regarding the mind, we now
know different. Thanks to the work of many neuroscientists, we know that
what you do, who you love, where you live, what you eat, how much you
move, what kind of stress you experience, if you have a pet, whether you

laugh a lot—all those and a zillion more bits of experience constantly change
who you are in subtle ways. Your brain responds to all these cues in turn.
Most people do not realize what fantastically great news this is. We can
change who we are and where we’re headed. It’s not easy, but it can be done,
and done at any age. You’re never too old to find a new life, a new love, a
better day. Our brains present us with the opportunity day in and day out. We
just have to unwrap the gift.
The science of the last thirty years also explains, at least in part, the
tension and the contradictions that lie at the core of ADHD and VAST. It

and done at any age. You’re never too old to find a new life, a new love, a
better day. Our brains present us with the opportunity day in and day out. We
just have to unwrap the gift.
The science of the last thirty years also explains, at least in part, the
tension and the contradictions that lie at the core of ADHD and VAST. It
explains what’s going on in our brains that leads to creativity,
entrepreneurialism, and dynamism, but also, at the same time, irrational
brooding, worrying, ruminating, and falling prey to self-destructive addictions
and compulsions. If Hank had known about all this, he might have been able
to circumvent his tortured thoughts. He also could have started to use his
talents—empathy, emotional intelligence, and creativity—to excel in his
chosen profession.
BRAIN BASICS
In chapter 1 we stressed that ADHD is a syndrome of contradictions and
paradoxes. Each negative has a matched positive and vice versa. You can
focus, but then not focus, or you’re forced into hyperfocus when you don’t
want to be. We emphasized the inconsistency created by the brain’s dueling
banjos, so to speak, and how ADHD is never all good or all bad. Now we can
explain why this is so.
Central to both the gift of creativity and the curse of brooding lie two
mindsets we like to call the Angel and the Demon. These are not at all
religious references. We think of them more like the benevolent spirit that
whispers encouragement from one shoulder and the imp on the other who
gives terrible advice. The Angel bestows the gifts, and the Demon casts the
curse. With practical tools, you can learn to activate the Angel while shutting
down the Demon—often without medication.

To unpack all this, let’s begin with some nuts-and-bolts explanations that
apply to everyone, VAST, ADHD, or “neurotypical,” as we say in psychiatry.
When you are engaged in a task of any kind, from frying an egg to
writing an email to digging a hole, various clumps of neurons, together called
a connectome, “light up” in your brain. We can see this through the exciting
new science of fMRI, or functional magnetic resonance imaging. It’s like a
live, moving X-ray, and it’s as close as we now can get to watching thought in
motion.
The connectome that lights up when you’re engaged in a task is called the
task-positive network, or TPN. Aptly named, the TPN gets you down to work.
You’re deliberately doing something and you are intent on it, unaware of
much beyond the bounds of what you’re doing. In this state, you don’t
consciously know whether you’re happy or not, which is just as good as being
happy, if not better, because you’re not wasting any energy in self-assessment.
You may become frustrated with what you’re doing and have moments of
anger or dismay, but if you stay in the task, in the TPN, those moments will
pass, and the TPN, buoyant connectome that it is, will carry you along. When
you’re thinking with the TPN, you’re in the Angel mindset. But you can also
get trapped in the TPN, doing a task from which you cannot disengage. This
is the hyperfocused state that people with ADHD can fall into. Far from
being helpful, it can keep you stuck in one task, unable to shut down the
screen, turn off the TV, or move from one paragraph to the next. This is the
often unrecognized downside of focus.
Incidentally, the reason that so many people are starting to look and act
distracted, as if they all have ADHD or VAST, is that fewer and fewer people

being helpful, it can keep you stuck in one task, unable to shut down the
screen, turn off the TV, or move from one paragraph to the next. This is the
often unrecognized downside of focus.
Incidentally, the reason that so many people are starting to look and act
distracted, as if they all have ADHD or VAST, is that fewer and fewer people
are spending time in the task-positive network. They are not spending enough
time focusing on a single task, certainly not long enough to dig a deep enough
hole or write an email longer than a sentence or two or do more than look at
an egg, let alone fry one. Unfortunately, the TPN is akin to a muscle that
atrophies when not used. So as we mentally flit around, the TPN weakens and
our attention span shortens.
When you allow your mind to wander from a task, or when you finish the
task, or if you pause too long in anger or dismay while doing the task, the
TPN in your brain defaults to a different connectome. Not surprisingly—
given that we default to this state—this other connectome is called the default

mode network (DMN). The DMN allows for expansive, imaginative, and
creative thinking. The back half of the DMN—called the posterior cingulate
—facilitates your autobiographic memory, your personal history. This allows
you to think back, draw upon, and pick apart the past. The front part, the
medial prefrontal cortex, is the opposite. It enables you to look forward and to
think about, imagine, and plan for the future.
It is in the DMN mode that you can daydream (and miss your exit on the
highway) or make interesting connections between concepts (helpful when
appreciating riddles or jokes or solving crossword puzzles, or coming up with
the Next Big Thing). It was surely in the DMN that the wheel was discovered!
The DMN and TPN are the yin and yang of your brain. Both help us and
hold us back in certain ways. One isn’t better than the other. But as helpful as
the DMN can be (angelic in its own right), it is also a Demon (as its initialism
suggests!) for the ADHD or VAST brain because of our capacity for
intractable rumination while captive in it.
THE GLITCHY SWITCH
For neurotypical people, toggling over to the DMN periodically allows you to
get some intellectual rest and relaxation—daydreaming time, for instance,
which isn’t necessarily bad. But highly imaginative, creative people—like
those of us who have ADHD or VAST—often get stuck in the DMN, leading
to horribly negative, gloomy, and self-critical thoughts like the ones we saw in
Hank’s experience earlier.
While we are all wired to feel fear and imagine disaster far more than to
feel comfortable and secure (along with our five senses, the imagination is our
chief evolutionary danger detector), people who have ADHD or VAST are
also particularly prone to head toward gloom and doom in their minds
because they have stored up in their memory banks a lifetime of moments of
failure, disappointment, shame, frustration, defeat, and embarrassment. Given
a moment to reflect on what’s likely to happen next, life has taught people
with ADHD to imagine and expect the worst. Too many facts are readily
available to support the thesis that, well, life sucks.

because they have stored up in their memory banks a lifetime of moments of
failure, disappointment, shame, frustration, defeat, and embarrassment. Given
a moment to reflect on what’s likely to happen next, life has taught people
with ADHD to imagine and expect the worst. Too many facts are readily
available to support the thesis that, well, life sucks.

The cutting-edge work of a neuroscientist and professor at MIT named
John Gabrieli points up another reason that people with ADHD or the
variable attention stimulus trait are more prone to negativity.
“I think of the Default Mode Network as our internal self-system,” says
Gabrieli. “It’s a bit of a chatterbox.” Some chatter is good, some is
destructive.
To paraphrase Gabrieli, the problem when ADHD enters in is twofold.
The first is what’s called the anticorrelation property of the two networks.
Imagine a seesaw. In a neurotypical brain, when the TPN is turned on and
you’re on task, the DMN is turned off. But in the ADHD brain, the fMRI
shows that when the TPN is turned on, the DMN is turned on as well, trying to
muscle its way in and pull you into its grasp, thereby distracting you. In
ADHD, therefore, the DMN competes with the TPN, which in most people it
does not do.
Adding another important spin, Gabrieli says that within the DMN itself,
between the front and back regions, the opposite occurs: “Typically, people
have synchrony in their default mode network. They go up and down together.
Not so in the ADHD brain. They are off-kilter, out of sync.” That’s what’s
meant by anticorrelation. Instead of working in unison, they work against
each other.
If that’s not complicated enough, Gabrieli explains an even more
important issue undermining the ADHD brain. It’s how these networks
interact, both internally and with each other.
Adjusting his glasses, he makes his strongest point:
“If there is one takeaway in distilling down the complexity of the DMN and
the TPN, it boils down to the fact that the toggle switches between them are off
in those with ADHD.”
In other words, in most people the DMN does not slip so easily into the
TPN; the gears mesh well and are not glitchy. But in people who have
ADHD, the gears get stripped, so to speak, and so you’re left with this
dangerous/wonderful curse/gift. This is truly a malfunction of the
imagination, and it explains the confluence of the creative and depressive we
so often see within the same person, even within the same hour.

The creative side gains expression and something beautiful takes shape.
But then the depressive side carps, “That’s ugly. You’ve failed again.” The
creative side sinks under the weight until its natural resilience and buoyancy
—or the glitchy switch—brings it back with a bang.
The blessing and the curse vie for top billing, for attention. When the
DMN brings lovely images, it is our golden tool. But when it jumps track into
the TPN and hijacks consciousness, then the DMN becomes the Demon, the
seat of misery, the disease of the imagination. Trapped in the past or future
in the DMN, you’re likely to abandon projects you once started with
enthusiasm, make careless mistakes, or, worse, fall into a state of misery and
despair, for no good reason whatsoever.
All creative people can recognize only too well the phenomenon of being
on a roll—creating—only to have a negative voice trying to interrupt the
process. That’s the faulty “toggle switch” allowing the DMN to intrude on the

enthusiasm, make careless mistakes, or, worse, fall into a state of misery and
despair, for no good reason whatsoever.
All creative people can recognize only too well the phenomenon of being
on a roll—creating—only to have a negative voice trying to interrupt the
process. That’s the faulty “toggle switch” allowing the DMN to intrude on the
TPN. Being trapped in it is painful; the term “tortured artist” fits. Indeed,
many of our greatest scientists, inventors, performers, and writers have
struggled with glitchy connections, vacillating between creating great works
and languishing in despair, often seeking relief in drugs, alcohol, or self-
destructive compulsive activity.
ADHD AND ADDICTION
When the DMN rules, it demands more. This hunger can be satisfied through
artistic achievement or through entrepreneurial wheeling and dealing or,
maybe best of all, through love. But if and when these efforts don’t pay off—
the novel you’re writing doesn’t resonate with readers, the deal falls through,
the relationship ends—you have to start the search again for how you will
bring ordinary life sufficiently alive to satisfy the hunger of your imagination.
While this hunger can lead to magnificent achievements of many kinds, in
the extreme, this exact same hunger drives addiction. That’s why addictions of
all kinds are five to ten times more common in people who have ADHD than
in the general population. We live with an itch at our core that can only be
scratched in certain ways. Creative achievement is perhaps the most adaptive,

worthwhile, and sustainable, while addictions—of all kinds—are the most
maladaptive and destructive.
All of this goes a long way toward explaining the truism so often observed
that creative talent goes hand in hand with addiction, depression, bipolar
disorder, ADHD, and all manner of mental disturbance. It’s largely a function
of the overlap of the Angel and the Demon, the glitchy connections that
appear in this part of the brain in highly creative people, certainly in people
who’ve been studied with classically defined ADHD. Though the connection
has not been formally researched, we see people with the variable attention
stimulus trait (VAST) in our practices who are increasingly struggling with
addictions too.
THE GLITCHY SWITCH IN ACTION
Now that you know a little bit about glitchy connections and faulty toggle
switches in the ADHD brain, you can start to recognize when you or a loved
one is stuck, and what part of the brain is taking hold. This is of enormous
practical value, not just academic interest, which we will get into later.
But first, an illustration. John Ratey’s uncle Ron. While he is, sadly, no
longer with us, the stories surrounding his ADHD are legendary within the
family and live on in affectionate retelling at holiday gatherings. A beloved
elementary school teacher, Ron raised four kids with his wife, Gretchen,
whom he adored.
One year, in celebration of the arrival of spring after a cold winter, Ron
and Gretchen set out to the hardware store to get flowers and plants for the
front yard, along with a few other supplies for the house. Pulling in to the
parking lot, they got out of the car and decided to divide and conquer, with
Ron getting the plants and Gretchen setting off to the plumbing department.
With enthusiastic zeal, Uncle Ron made a beeline for the gardening section.
He jumped deep into his DMN, envisioning how each type of flower and

front yard, along with a few other supplies for the house. Pulling in to the
parking lot, they got out of the car and decided to divide and conquer, with
Ron getting the plants and Gretchen setting off to the plumbing department.
With enthusiastic zeal, Uncle Ron made a beeline for the gardening section.
He jumped deep into his DMN, envisioning how each type of flower and
foliage would look in the front yard, making mental notes on where his shovel
and planting tools were in the garage, and daydreaming about how beautiful
the yard would look after it was all finished.

Once home, digging in the dirt, Ron moved squarely into his task mode to
a fault, methodically plotting out the perfect distance between the plants,
creating exacting, uniform holes, taking care to watch the roots as he pulled
the plants from the plastic containers.
This continued until his teenaged daughter, Renee, came out the front
door.
“Dad, where’s Mom?” she asked.
It took a minute to sink in. Uncle Ron suddenly realized that he had left
Gretchen at the store. When he left the parking lot, he was so focused in the
front part of his DMN, planning for the future, envisioning his garden, that he
didn’t connect to the back part of his DMN, the history that revealed he had a
wife he adored, and the memory that they had driven to the store together.
If you think he panicked, apologizing profusely, thinking about the love
of his life stranded and alone, you would be wrong. Uncle Ron was now so
deep in his TPN, focusing on the singular task of taking his plantings to the
finish line, he continued to carefully smooth the dirt around a peony with one
hand while tossing his keys to Renee with the other, instructing her to take
the car to get her mother.
“But, Dad,” said Renee, “I just have my learner’s permit. I can’t drive
alone.”
Uncle Ron was very involved with and loved his kids. He frequently rode
shotgun with Renee as she learned to drive on side roads and in parking lots.
At this point in our story, he had actually arranged for her to have a driving
test the following week, so he clearly knew she only had a learner’s permit.
But his brain was so rigidly focused on his task of planting his flowers that it
was not easily connecting to those historical facts in his DMN.
Leaving Gretchen stranded wasn’t an isolated incident.
Gretchen was a substitute teacher, and when she got an assignment at a
nearby school, Ron often dropped her off before continuing on to his own
job. More than once, he walked through the front door at the end of the day,
only to be met with sickening silence and the realization he had forgotten to
pick up his wife where he’d left her that morning.
It was not until years later, when their son was being tested for ADHD,
that Ron discovered his own. Explaining that ADHD tends to run in families,

job. More than once, he walked through the front door at the end of the day,
only to be met with sickening silence and the realization he had forgotten to
pick up his wife where he’d left her that morning.
It was not until years later, when their son was being tested for ADHD,
that Ron discovered his own. Explaining that ADHD tends to run in families,

the psychiatrist inquired if Ron wanted to take a test as well. As you might
expect, he was off the charts with his diagnosis.
While you might have smiled appreciatively at Uncle Ron’s story, the
consequences of having faulty, glitchy connections in your brain can
sometimes be much more devastating and exhausting than just your spouse’s
inconvenience. It can seriously affect schoolwork, your job, your
relationships, and your overall feeling of well-being. Those of us with ADHD
or VAST battle constant frustration from being two steps behind (not to
mention the ire of those we are behind) because we’re trapped in one area of
the brain or another.
Another extremely common problem when caught in the DMN is what we
call “pirouette syndrome,” a circling back to make sure you’ve done
something you’ve already done. Some people pirouette to be sure they’ve
locked the front door, or didn’t leave eggs boiling on the stove; others circle
back to find something they are sure they’ve forgotten: sunglasses, a wallet.
When you aren’t paying attention in your TPN, it takes a lot of energy to
check and double-check to make sure you didn’t pull a royal screw-up.
Chances are you did lock the door, took the eggs off the stove, and had your
sunglasses on top of your head, but because you weren’t focused in the
moment, niggling doubt keeps you panicked until you can go back and check.
Still another curse of the Demon is catastrophic thinking. We refer to this
as Chicken Little syndrome, as it’s easy to believe the sky is falling. A young
attorney confessed she has a tough time starting new cases as she immediately
jumps to the future part of her DMN and stays there, endlessly envisioning
and obsessing about what can go wrong with her argument, the five thousand
ways her client might misbehave, the ten thousand ways she might blow it
with the jury. As she knows only too well, while it is always good to develop
options in case things go wrong, if you stay there too long, you can’t focus on
the task at hand and work effectively toward preventing those mistakes.
Of course, catastrophic thinking is a form of rumination. Your boss
throws off a comment that you perceive as a slight. The rear part of the DMN
spins into overdrive, looking back at what she said, taking it apart, wondering
what you did to deserve that. Was it really a pointed dig? Then you beat
yourself up, thinking back, ruminating on what you might have said or done
to provoke the comment. You take apart every imperfect thing you said or did

spins into overdrive, looking back at what she said, taking it apart, wondering
what you did to deserve that. Was it really a pointed dig? Then you beat
yourself up, thinking back, ruminating on what you might have said or done
to provoke the comment. You take apart every imperfect thing you said or did

at work, reliving the embarrassment. There’s more than enough angst to go
around.
Then there’s the front part of the DMN, where you ruminate on plans and
make lists. You go over and over and over what you will say to your boss to
straighten things out, or how you will chastise her and quit, stressing about
her reaction, your cowardice, and the fallout. You’re convinced you’re going
to screw it up, as this is the part of the brain that projects humiliating
occurrences happening again.
THE CLEVER ART OF OUTSMARTING THE DEMON
There’s a famous saying among neuroscientists: Neurons that fire together,
wire together. To be sure, when you’re ruminating, you’re repeatedly doing
something that fosters a negative connection over time. But this neurological
understanding shines a light on the solution as well: If neurons that fire
together, wire together (making increasingly permanent connections), you
need to fire them in another direction. The trick is to take advantage of the
fact that the DMN can jump tracks. Because if it can run to darkness, well,
then, we can make it jump tracks and run to the light. Two can play at this
game!
In other words: Spend more time in the TPN focusing on a single task. We
know what you might be thinking: The whole point is that I can’t focus on a
single task! But you can—you are already a master of distraction, so now
distract yourself. Productivity isn’t the point here. Moving the toggle switch
is.
As a practical matter, this means that the minute you start to ruminate
and slip into brooding negativity, look elsewhere. Do anything. Walk around.
Yell. Dance a jig. Dice celery. Play the piano. Feed your dog. Sing “Row,
Row, Row Your Boat” while standing on one leg. Tie your shoes. Whistle
“Dixie.” Blow your nose. Jump rope. Bark like a dog, howl like a wolf, call a
radio show and vent like a maniac. Do a crossword. Work your brain. Read a
book. Hell, why not write a book? Sure, dig a hole or fry a few eggs. Or try an
exercise that zeroes in on your breathing. Pick a pattern to focus on, for

example, 6-3-8-3. Inhale for six beats, hold for three, exhale for eight beats,
hold for three; repeat. After a few cycles, you will move out of the DMN.
The point is: Focus on anything external to yourself. Activating the TPN
will shut down the DMN. It’s difficult to do because the DMN is seductive and
the negative messages it is feeding you are captivating and convincing, borne
out of your past experiences, but you must not allow yourself to be drawn in,
you must quickly do something active, to engage the TPN.
Once you engage the TPN, you can usually turn the Demon back into the
Angel it was before. You can redirect the imagination to feed the TPN with
positive, constructive material. Then the DMN becomes the Angel it’s meant
to be: facilitative imagination. It’s only when it is at rest, in repose, not
creating, that it spews bile and becomes the Demon. When it feeds on itself,
the angelic imagination turns demonic. This devil does indeed find work for
idle hands.
One caveat: Even though we’ve touted the TPN as your ally and friend,

to be: facilitative imagination. It’s only when it is at rest, in repose, not
creating, that it spews bile and becomes the Demon. When it feeds on itself,
the angelic imagination turns demonic. This devil does indeed find work for
idle hands.
One caveat: Even though we’ve touted the TPN as your ally and friend,
it’s important to note that it’s not blameless and it, too, can go to the extreme.
Indeed, we often refer to people who are the opposite of ADHD as having
“attention surplus disorder.” These are the bureaucrats, the automatons, the
emotionless, by-the-book, detail-oriented types who are never late and always
obey rules but never have new ideas and never laugh. They are habitually
stuck in the TPN. Think about Uncle Ron and his analytical focus on his
plants, losing sight of any empathy for the beloved wife he left at the store.
When you’re stuck in the TPN, it’s easy to think about people in mechanical
rather than relational ways. Whoever came up with the expression “one track
mind” was inadvertently describing the TPN.
One study of managers showed that leaders totally focused on task are
less supportive and nurturing of their teams than other managers. They can be
rigid, narrow-minded, and unaccepting of ideas from others. Research
suggests a quick fix is oxytocin, also known as the love drug or cuddle
hormone, as it is released with a hug or warm social bonding. While a hug
might not be appropriate in the workplace, it is something you can certainly
try with a loved one. And for those with pets, you have a built-in prescription.
Maybe it’s time to bring more pets into the workplace!

WHAT CAN HANK DO?
If Hank could learn that the recurring thoughts and feelings that so torment
him were not representations of dismal truth but artifacts of his prolific
imagination, then he could learn to switch his focus away from those surges of
fear and imagined doom that so haunt him and hold him back.
Perhaps Hank needs medication as well, but someone in his predicament
is ripe for coaching on how to shut down the DMN, how not to feed the
Demon. In finding ways of engaging his imagination in constructive tasks, he
will be able to turn the DMN into an Angel, by connecting it—his
imagination—to a useful task, thus activating the TPN. Meditation, exercise,
and human connection can also reduce the power of the glitchy switches.
We have found this to be a monumentally useful insight for many of our
patients. It’s all new to them, hot off the presses of the scientific literature,
ready to be used to put down the agonies the DMN can stir up.
While complicated in its anatomy, physiology, biochemistry, and synaptic
flow, the DMN is easy to understand for the layman, if spelled out in plain
English. So, as we recap, we’ll keep it simple:
Don’t feed the Demon.
Shut off its oxygen by denying it your attention.
Do something else that engages your mind.
Stay in action!

CHAPTER 3
The Cerebellum Connection
s our discussion of the TPN and DMN in the last chapter should
make clear, we live in an era of increased understanding about the most
dazzling, complicated, stupefying, powerful, protean, mystifying, and above
all productive creation in all of nature: the human brain. And each of us gets
to have one to call our very own!
A few numbers you might want to know about your brain: Far from
physically beautiful to behold, weighing in at around 3 pounds (only about
one-third the weight of a sperm whale’s brain but about 15,000 times heavier
than a goldfish’s), the adult human brain houses about 100 billion cells. (Our
own galaxy, the Milky Way, interestingly enough, contains about 100 billion
stars.) Since each neuron connects with a hundred to thousands of other
neurons at junctions called synapses, a staggering 150 trillion synapses enliven
your brain and mine.
But on with our story. Another important brain-related development with
huge and hopeful implications for people with ADHD or symptoms of VAST
is our understanding of the area of the brain called the cerebellum.
Located at the base and back of the brain in two kumquat-shaped lobes,
the cerebellum is small—it occupies only 10 percent of brain volume—but it
is powerful: it contains a full 75 percent of the neurons of the brain.

We’ve known about the existence of the cerebellum for centuries—the
Italian Renaissance artist Leonardo da Vinci used the term in his writing—
and we’ve known that in concert with the vestibular system of the inner ear, it
operates like a little gyroscope to coordinate our balance and physical
movements. Indeed, the combined components are commonly referred to as
the vestibulocerebellar system, or VCS, which is much less of a mouthful. The
VCS is also implicated in the coordination and strengthening of various
physical skills.
INNER WORKINGS (VCS BASICS)
That a fish is able to unconsciously and automatically maintain or change its
place in the water is thanks to its VCS, always hard at work keeping the fish
balanced and “aware” of whether it is moving vertically, horizontally, or
diagonally.
This same orientation system has evolved—we’re talking millions of
years, as fish predate us—in humans, but in a far more sophisticated fashion.
In fact, it’s so sophisticated that it takes several years after birth before the
human cerebellum and vestibular system reach maturity.
You can easily see how immature and poorly developed the human
cerebellum is early on in life when watching a baby learn to walk. When
babies start out, they stagger like drunks, only adorably so. But boy oh boy,
just as toddlers do, our VCS comes on like gangbusters once it gets growing
and helps us master new physical skills.
Or take the example of learning to ride a bike. At first, almost everyone
has trouble finding their balance and coordinating the many small muscle
movements needed to control wobbling and avoid falling. But gradually you
learn to make the minute corrections that maintain your balance. Your VCS
connects with your motor neurons, you lean a little this way or that, then
voilà! You are soon off and cycling. (If you had to rely on your frontal cortex
—the front, cortical part of the brain where we do our critical thinking—to
calculate those corrections, you’d fall every time, because frontocortical

connects with your motor neurons, you lean a little this way or that, then
voilà! You are soon off and cycling. (If you had to rely on your frontal cortex
—the front, cortical part of the brain where we do our critical thinking—to
calculate those corrections, you’d fall every time, because frontocortical

thinking is about a hundred thousand times slower than the cerebellum’s
calculations.)
After some practice—longer for some, shorter for others—riding a
bicycle becomes automatic, the neurologically necessary process ingrained. If
you don’t ride a bike for a while and feel kind of rusty when you try again, the
VCS will help you steady yourself. But the pathways the cerebellum lays
down tend to last. Once you learn to ride a bike, you can stay off bikes for
decades only to get on again and ride off with hardly a quiver. Hence the
expression “It’s like riding a bike” to describe a skill you need to learn only
once to have learned for life.
Anyone deeply engaged in an endeavor that requires split-second
decisions out of nowhere is relying on the vestibulocerebellar system to kick
in: a concert pianist, a brain surgeon, an airline pilot in an emergency landing.
But consider the colorful and more visible (to the television audience,
anyway) example of a football quarterback in action. Physical balance clearly
matters, as he must run around ducking tacklers and avoiding sacks while also
looking down the field. Keeping his balance is job one. But then there’s so
much more. If you were to list all the observations and calculations—and
decisions based upon those observations and calculations—that the
quarterback must make, the list would be hundreds of items long. And just
exactly how much time does the quarterback get to do this? It is generally
accepted that a pro quarterback must do something with the ball—throw a
pass, hand the ball off, or run with it himself—within 2.8 seconds after the
center snaps it to him. After 2.8 seconds, bad stuff happens. A sack, an
interception, a fumble, a broken play.
Clearly, a quarterback does not have time to sit down with a protractor
and a calculator and plot out his throw. He doesn’t even have time to
consciously flip through his memory bank of similar situations and decide
what to do. His decision, which we think of more as a supremely conditioned
reflex than an actual decision, derives from countless hours of film study,
practice reps, rehearsed situations, drills, and more practice, until—allowing
for some on-the-spot innovation—the decision becomes all but automatic.
This entire process—this cascade of brain bifurcation points and synaptic
firings—comes under the purview of the magnificent, newly knighted
cerebellum.

Of course, things can go wrong.
Try this: Touch the tip of your nose with your index finger and then touch
that same finger to something about a foot in front of you (the wall or a book
or piece of furniture). Now touch your fingertip to your nose again. If this all
comes easily to you, you have your cerebellum to thank—it’s in working
order, discerning distance and the orientation in space of the things you want
to touch. If you misjudge the distance to the wall and back again or touch a
spot in space rather than your nose, you are demonstrating dysmetria, an
impairment of spatial judgment that means you miss the mark—the literal
translation is “wrong length”—and indicates a malfunction in your

order, discerning distance and the orientation in space of the things you want
to touch. If you misjudge the distance to the wall and back again or touch a
spot in space rather than your nose, you are demonstrating dysmetria, an
impairment of spatial judgment that means you miss the mark—the literal
translation is “wrong length”—and indicates a malfunction in your
cerebellum. Usually caused by an injury (surgery, trauma, infection, stroke, or
another brain “insult”), other physical symptoms of cerebellar dysfunction
include losing your balance easily, staggering, or impaired gait.
IMPROVED CEREBELLAR FUNCTION = IMPROVED
ADHD SYMPTOMS
In 1998, our understanding of the cerebellum took a revolutionary step
forward, with big (though unexpected) implications for ADHD. Jeremy
Schmahmann, a professor of neurology at Harvard Medical School and a
doctor at Massachusetts General Hospital (and now the director of the
Schmahmann Lab for Neuroanatomy and Cerebellar Neurobiology at MGH),
published a paper in Trends in Cognitive Sciences based on research he had
done testing and observing people with injuries of the cerebellum. The paper
was called Dysmetria of Thought. In it—as might be expected from this
paper’s title—he suggested that dysfunction of the cerebellum could cause us
to lose not only our physical balance, but also our emotional equilibrium. In
other words, just as the cerebellum had long been known to act as a kind of
gyroscope or balancer of gait and movement, he explained, “so does it
regulate the speed, capacity, consistency, and appropriateness of cognition
and emotional processes.”
By showing that the cerebellum plays a critical and central role in a
person’s ability to learn new skills, regulate emotion, and sustain focus,

Schmahmann overturned generations of received wisdom. Put simply, his
thinking was an innovative extrapolation from what had long been known
about the function of the cerebellum. His research posited a far grander and
more central role for the two kumquats at the back of the brain.
In fact, there is a now a well-recognized syndrome in neurology called
cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome (CCAS) or, eponymously, simply
Schmahmann’s syndrome. It results from damage done to the cerebellum
through stroke, trauma, surgical resection of a tumor, genetic anomaly, or any
other insult. The symptoms of CCAS include problems with executive
function, problems with linguistic processing, difficulty with spatial cognition
(as assessed by drawing a clock or a cube), and affective (emotional)
regulation. Does that list of cognitive issues sound familiar? Pretty darn close
to ADHD.
In another paper (published in the Journal of Neuropsychiatry and
Clinical Neurosciences in 2004), Schmahmann introduced the idea of a
universal cerebellar transform (UCT) that acts as a stabilizer of thinking,
emotion, and behavior. He called the UCT an “oscillation dampener,” which
means it works to diminish the erratic fluctuations in our thinking, feeling,
and behavior. Using case studies of people in whom the UCT had been
damaged, he described it as capable of automatically “smoothing out
performance in all domains” without interrupting conscious thought, much as
it does for the bicycle rider. And it helps you maintain what Schmahmann
called a “homeostatic baseline,” helping to preserve emotional and cognitive
stability by sending out small signals that do not rise to the level of

damaged, he described it as capable of automatically “smoothing out
performance in all domains” without interrupting conscious thought, much as
it does for the bicycle rider. And it helps you maintain what Schmahmann
called a “homeostatic baseline,” helping to preserve emotional and cognitive
stability by sending out small signals that do not rise to the level of
consciousness. This explains, at least in part, how you can guide a thought
through a series of revisions, interruptions, or challenges in your mind
without getting confused. It also helps explain how you can reach a fever
pitch in a declaration of love without becoming psychotic, or how you can
sustain anger without becoming incoherent. In a number of his injured or
impaired patients, these capabilities were absent.
As mentioned earlier, one way to think about the central challenge in
ADHD is gaining better braking control over the metaphorical Ferrari brain,
both in terms of the speed at which it operates and the level of emotion it can
emit. If Schmahmann’s research proves that cerebellar injuries of all kinds
can lead to the loss of control of the oscillation dampener (the brakes), it’s

not a big leap to postulate that by beefing up or returning the cerebellum to
top working order, you might beef up your braking power, enhancing control
over thought and emotion without losing any talents or capabilities in the
process.
Based on Schmahmann’s research, and based on the findings from other
MRI studies that show that the central strip down the midline of the
cerebellum—called the vermis—is ever so slightly smaller in people who have
ADHD than in people who do not,
*1 
it makes sense to think that stimulating
and challenging the cerebellum/VCS, the way lifting a weight stimulates and
challenges a muscle, might help reduce the negative symptoms of ADHD.
This idea gets a major assist from neuroplasticity, the concept that the brain
can change over a lifetime (discussed in chapter 2). Among all the regions of
the brain, the cerebellum is the most plastic, the most changeable of all, able
to promote the growth of existing neurons, making them look, on scans,
bushier, with more interconnecting branches, like full treetops. Basically, it’s
been shown that you can take your cerebellum to the cerebellar gym and beef
it up.
And that’s exactly what a number of current treatments aim to do.
NEW TREATMENTS IN THE BALANCE
An obvious way to improve vestibular health and possibly increase cerebellar
strength is to work on one’s balance. And, in fact, the idea that using
balancing exercises can help ADHD (and dyslexia) has been in the air for
decades. In the 1960s a man named Frank Belgau invented the Belgau
Balance Board. Based on his empirical observation that balance and learning
go hand in hand (a special educator in Houston, Belgau had major learning
problems himself
*2
), Belgau developed his balance board treatment to help
his students. He never did the controlled studies needed to make the
treatment scientifically legitimate and gain commercial momentum, but Mr.
Belgau has many devotees and believers—his boards are still marketed and
available today under the auspices of a company called Learning
Breakthrough.

), Belgau developed his balance board treatment to help
his students. He never did the controlled studies needed to make the
treatment scientifically legitimate and gain commercial momentum, but Mr.
Belgau has many devotees and believers—his boards are still marketed and
available today under the auspices of a company called Learning
Breakthrough.

A trained chiropractor named Robert Melillo has taken Mr. Belgau’s work
one step further, writing a book entitled Disconnected Kids. Based on that
work, he created a corporation that franchised over one hundred Brain
Balance Achievement Centers around the United States. The balancing
exercise protocols developed and offered at these centers work off Melillo’s
ideas about connection and disconnection between the hemispheres of the
brain. Mr. Melillo’s brain balance program is aimed at kids with more severe
conditions than run-of-the-mill ADHD. You have to go to the center three
times per week for one hour, so, including travel, the time commitment is
high. And, depending on the center, the fees are not low. However, in our
opinion, they do provide a valuable and usually successful treatment for
selected children with more severe ADHD or autism.
Another program worth mentioning that is useful for a wide range of
issues—from spatial awareness to learning issues—is called Zing
Performance. Dr. Hallowell’s son used Zing techniques for a reading problem,
and his wife enrolled because she had the habit of driving over curbs! Both
were greatly helped by the process.
In Zing, the subject first goes through a physical assessment of eye
tracking speed and accuracy as well as attention span, either in person or
online. Once the assessment is complete, the subject gets a series of exercises
to do for ten minutes, twice a day. Zing has a wide repertoire of exercises that
vary in practice but that all stimulate the cerebellum and the vestibular system
through challenging balance and coordination.
The exercises include rotational stimulation, which has you turn around
and around, the way you did as a kid, to make yourself dizzy, thus activating
the vestibular system. Or lateral stimulation, which includes tilting from side
to side with variations on that theme. And then vertical stimulation, which
includes jumping and hopping in place or hopping forward.
You may be asked to stand on a wobble board not unlike those developed
by Mr. Belgau. Once you get good at that, you’re asked to stand on the board
with your eyes closed. And then, still with eyes closed, to do some simple
arithmetic calculations or repeat a series of numbers backward. Once you
open your eyes, you’re asked to toss a ball, then two balls, up in the air and
catch them while you’re still on the wobble board.

Regardless of the specifics, the exercises increase in difficulty as the
subject progresses through the program, which typically takes three to six
months. But, no pain, no gain! And the gain is clear. These exercises, if done
faithfully, do indeed work the vestibular system hard, and many report
subsequent improvements in the symptoms of ADHD.
Zing is working on getting the funding and organization for a randomized
controlled trial, which would be the gold-standard test of its efficacy. In the
meantime, Zing does have some impressive numbers to support the method.
Fifty thousand people (of all ages) have gone through the Zing program for
treatment of ADHD and/or dyslexia. According to Wynford Dore, Zing’s

Zing is working on getting the funding and organization for a randomized
controlled trial, which would be the gold-standard test of its efficacy. In the
meantime, Zing does have some impressive numbers to support the method.
Fifty thousand people (of all ages) have gone through the Zing program for
treatment of ADHD and/or dyslexia. According to Wynford Dore, Zing’s
founder, 80 percent achieve significant success. Dore himself is so confident
in the treatment that he offers a money-back guarantee to all who sign up for
the program; he reports that he is very rarely asked for refunds. (To learn
more, and to see Dr. Hallowell’s interview with Wynford Dore, go to
distraction.zingperformance.com.)
A personal aside: We have seen so many possible breakthroughs fizzle
that we’ve become a little jaded. We’ve learned the wisdom in the saying
“When a new and exciting treatment for anything comes along, hurry to use it
as soon as you can, while it still works.” We’ve seen quite a number of
treatments, from new drugs to new devices and brain games, go from being
the greatest thing since sliced bread to being about as valuable as a single slice
of that bread. Dr. Hallowell, however, has been offering the Zing treatment to
some of his patients with good results. At the very least it is another tool in
our toolbox, and a potential game changer.
THE INNER EAR AND ONE OUTSIDE-THE-BOX DOCTOR
More than twenty years before Dr. Schmahmann published his work on the
sensitivities of the cerebellum and the workings of the inner ear, one
pioneering—or off-the-tracks, depending on your point of view—doctor
began working successfully with treatments for ADHD (and dyslexia) that Dr.
Schmahmann’s research might begin to explain. The pioneer in question is
Harold Levinson, M.D., and (at this writing) he’s practicing today, though he
is still very much considered out of the mainstream. His treatment protocol

has been to prescribe motion sickness medications like meclizine (Antivert,
Bonine), Dramamine, and more recently the marvelously flexible Benadryl to
people with ADHD and dyslexia. We admire Dr. Levinson for his courage in
sticking to his guns, especially because he reports that his patients are getting
excellent results. It’s hard to believe they would have continued to come to
him for decades were they not achieving at least some positive results from
his unusual—but maybe no longer so crazy-sounding—regimen.
Now that it is becoming clearer that the inner ear and vestibular system
play a significant role in ADHD, dyslexia, and an array of other conditions,
Dr. Levinson may gain more respect. On the other hand, neither of us
prescribes antihistamines or motion sickness medications for ADHD,
dyslexia, or VAST because we have not seen or carefully studied the benefits
ourselves. But we both agree with the mounting evidence that the
vestibulocerebellar system is far more in play than we previously understood.
A CASE HISTORY
Dr. Hallowell recently made use of VCS stimulation in a fascinating but
highly unusual consultation he did via email on a little boy in Shanghai. The
story—related below by Dr. Hallowell—shows not only the power of working
on one’s balance, but also the other themes we emphasize throughout this
book: the power of finding connection and focusing on strengths over
weaknesses.
On a sunny Monday morning in October of 2018, I stood in the spacious
pit of an amphitheater in Shanghai before an audience of some 250 Chinese

story—related below by Dr. Hallowell—shows not only the power of working
on one’s balance, but also the other themes we emphasize throughout this
book: the power of finding connection and focusing on strengths over
weaknesses.
On a sunny Monday morning in October of 2018, I stood in the spacious
pit of an amphitheater in Shanghai before an audience of some 250 Chinese
adults, 90 percent female—mothers, teachers, and (as I came to find out
later) a few grandmothers.
I’ve given thousands of presentations, but that day I was more nervous
than I’d ever been before giving a talk. Having arrived in Shanghai the day
before, I was at last about to find out if my ideas could pull their weight in
China, a country with such a different culture from my country’s, three
thousand years of history compared to only about four hundred (since the
1607 settlement of Jamestown), a totally different language, four times as

many people, and a form of government I’d read about all my life but still
didn’t understand.
At least I did understand ADHD. I’d long dreamed of bringing my
approach across the Pacific to help the children in China, but I had no idea
how the Chinese would receive it. Would my emphasis on the human
connection fly? Would a country that still used corporal punishment in school
be receptive to an American promoting the notion of helping children feel
safe and secure in the classroom above all else? How would the Chinese take
to my saying that since computers memorize better than humans, teachers
ought to emphasize the development of the imagination in children instead of
rote memorization? Might the whole concept of attentional and emotional
problems be dismissed as disciplinary problems in disguise?
Within seconds I would find out. With my translator standing next to me,
I took a deep breath and began to talk. I’d never done this before, speaking in
short bursts, pausing for translation, before picking up where I left off, then
pausing again. Also new to me: I had no notes, no slides, no script of any
kind. The bulk of my talk described the behavior, diagnosis, and
compassionate, strength-based treatment of a composite character, a boy
whose characteristics and issues were made up to protect privacy but were
wholly based on the real people in my practice.
At first I couldn’t read the audience at all. These women were staring
blankly back at me as if I were speaking, well, English, while they spoke only
Chinese. But as the bursts of translation began to sink in, and I watched in
silence as they listened to the translation, I could see the facial expressions in
the audience change ever so slightly. But ever so slightly is all it takes when it
comes to facial expressions. Millimeters tell all.
I began to feed off the energy of the audience and became increasingly
animated. I could see them laughing—actually, tittering—at me slightly, but I
could tell it was affectionate tittering. I also sensed that my ideas were
resonating and sinking in. I could see some tears begin to trickle down cheeks
as I panned the audience each time I paused for translation.
When the talk ended, I got huge applause, and a number of audience
members came to the dais to meet me or to buy a copy of Driven to
Distraction, which had been translated into Chinese.

resonating and sinking in. I could see some tears begin to trickle down cheeks
as I panned the audience each time I paused for translation.
When the talk ended, I got huge applause, and a number of audience
members came to the dais to meet me or to buy a copy of Driven to
Distraction, which had been translated into Chinese.

One mother came up and stood nervously in front of me. After others had
spoken, I noticed she still had not had her chance, holding back politely, so I
invited her to speak. Thanking me, she told me how perfectly her seven-year-
old son fit the description of the boy with attention problems that I described
in my talk. As she described him it was all I could do to contain myself. “We
must get him the help he needs,” I said. “Right now.” But how? I wondered.
Since the mother lived here in Shanghai, I suggested we email each other and
try to work out a plan.
Over the following several months we did exactly that. What ensued was
the most unusual case I’ve ever conducted in my forty-year career. I met the
mother, whom I’ll call Lily, in person only that one time, for about a minute. I
never met the patient, her son—let’s call him Samuel—at all.
But Lily was not deterred by these facts; she didn’t feel that she could find
the help she needed for Samuel in Shanghai. I asked her, via email, what
could I do, seven thousand miles away, to help her son, not knowing her, him,
his father, the school, the teacher, the language, the curriculum, the customs,
the country, the resources, basically not knowing anything at all?
This is where my own ADHD and VAST characteristics came into play.
The challenge energized me. This felt like the right kind of difficult for me
(see chapter 5!). Lily wanted me to give it a try. I didn’t think I could do any
harm. So I said, via email, Let’s give it a shot.
First, I had to take a history and make a diagnosis. Samuel was having
trouble in school. Lily sent me a photo of him, showing a really cute little boy
in blue shorts and a yellow shirt playing soccer outside. He looked cheerful,
likable, and happy, but Lily told me about the trouble he was having focusing
and remembering directions and how his grades were suffering. Samuel was
becoming unhappier by the day.
Adding to his history was that he was left-handed and had been
“corrected,” as the Chinese put it, so now he was writing with his right hand.
I knew that this kind of “correction” often causes its own problems.
Not knowing how Lily would receive it, or whether she would be able to
make sense of it, I sent her the DSM-5 criteria for ADHD and asked her to
check off all the symptoms that she felt applied to Samuel.

She replied immediately, less than twenty-four hours after I pushed Send
on my email to her. In her opinion, Samuel had every single symptom listed
in DSM-5. Had this been a traditional assessment, the diagnosis would be
clear: ADHD, combined type.
Psychiatric treatment depends more than anything else, and more than in
any other specialty, on the relationship between the patient and the doctor.
While technically Samuel was the patient, practically speaking, Lily was; and
she and I were off to a great start.
For all that we had going against us, on the plus side, Lily spoke and
wrote good English, so my ignorance of Chinese would not matter much. In
addition, she was highly motivated and had already demonstrated that she
wanted to work with me to help her son.

While technically Samuel was the patient, practically speaking, Lily was; and
she and I were off to a great start.
For all that we had going against us, on the plus side, Lily spoke and
wrote good English, so my ignorance of Chinese would not matter much. In
addition, she was highly motivated and had already demonstrated that she
wanted to work with me to help her son.
But I had to ask myself whether I could devise a treatment plan that Lily
could implement simply by following my suggestions via email. She did not
have easy access to a psychiatrist, so there’d be no doctor in China involved,
which meant we could not use medication.
You make do with what you’ve got. We were blessed to have email, which
afforded speedy communication, as well as a massively motivated, intelligent
mom, not to mention, as it turned out, a massively motivated, intelligent little
boy.
This started to get fun, though it was a challenge, for sure. I put together a
treatment plan based on the following elements:
1. My establishing trust with Lily.
2. Her having read Driven to Distraction in Chinese, enabling her to explain
my background and recommendations to her husband, to Samuel, and to
his teachers.
3. A strength-based model. Lily explained to Samuel that he had a race car
for a brain, but with bicycle brakes. I told her it was key for him to
understand that his race car brain was a great asset of which he should
feel proud. He just needed to work on his brakes, so that then he could
win races and become a champion.
4. Human connection and warmth. I asked Lily to hug Samuel a lot, in the
morning and in the evening, and tell him how much she loved him. I

stressed the importance of touch. Because he got so many reprimands at
school, he needed to get lots of love at home. I also told her to ask the
school to stop hitting him. If they were willing to put an end to corporal
punishment, I was sure that Samuel would progress much more rapidly.
My humble suggestion to the school was “Try treating him with kindness
and warmth.”
5. The promotion of a positive mindset. I asked Lily to adopt a constant
“You can do it” approach with Samuel, to try to implant in him the
conviction that not only could he succeed but he would succeed.
6. Reading aloud to him each night.
7. Each day before school, Lily’s telling him how much she loved him, what
a fast brain he had, that all he needed to do was strengthen his brakes and
he would win races, that one day he would be a champion and would
bring great credit to his family and his country.
8. Having Samuel do balancing exercises (cerebellar stimulation). Samuel
already played football (soccer), and he got plenty of traditional exercise.
So I gave Lily a set of exercises that challenge balance and coordination.
This was my homespun version of the Zing program as I explained it to
Lily: Samuel should do the balancing exercises listed below for thirty
minutes every day, in any order he wanted. I assured her that he could
change them around for variety. If you can, I said, get a wobble board, a
board with a rounded bottom so that it’s hard to balance on. Also get an
inflatable exercise ball that’s big enough for him to sit on so his legs can’t
touch the floor.
1. Stand on one leg for one minute or until he falls over.
2. Stand on one leg with eyes closed for one minute or until he falls
over.
3. Take off socks and then put on socks without sitting down.

board with a rounded bottom so that it’s hard to balance on. Also get an
inflatable exercise ball that’s big enough for him to sit on so his legs can’t
touch the floor.
1. Stand on one leg for one minute or until he falls over.
2. Stand on one leg with eyes closed for one minute or until he falls
over.
3. Take off socks and then put on socks without sitting down.
4. Stand on wobble board for as long as he can, up to five minutes, then
do it with eyes closed.
5. Sit on exercise ball with feet off the floor for as long as he can, up to
five minutes, then do it with eyes closed.

6. Put five playing cards on the floor. Standing on one leg, bend over
and pick up one card at a time.
7. Do a low plank hold (elbows down on the ground, feet extended
behind) for up to three minutes.
8. Learn to juggle balls, and then spend three to five minutes juggling.
Samuel started doing the exercises right away, and Lily held up her end of
the program as well. She hugged him, and she got her husband to do the
same. They changed their approach to talking with Samuel and asked his
school to do so also. To help the cause, Lily shared our book with his main
teacher, who in turn shared it with her administrators. Once Samuel started to
improve, they agreed to stop corporal punishments.
To hear Lily tell it, Samuel started to improve within a matter of weeks—
noticeably so. He was doing better in school—more focused, less disruptive
of his classes, more successful with homework and class participation. The
news of his transformation seemed to spread, she said, like juicy gossip.
Parents wanted to know what was going on with Samuel. Why were his scores
going up so much? They asked Lily what she was doing differently. No more
yelling, no more hitting, she explained. Many were surprised that Lily’s
husband was going along with this plan, but no one seemed to be arguing with
the results: Samuel’s better behavior and greater happiness. Lily reported that
others seemed impressed. All of this happened in a few short weeks, and it
continued for months.
Connection. Education. Exercise with an emphasis on cerebellar
stimulation. A strength-based model.
One day Samuel was given a chocolate for being the top student on a
Chinese exam. He brought the chocolate home and gave it to Lily. She asked
him, “Would you like to eat this now?”
He said, “Oh, no, Mom. That chocolate is much too important to eat.”
The first key element to this success story was connection. Making the
connection in person with Mom through my lecture was crucial. Even though
I didn’t speak Chinese, Lily spoke English, and we relied on help from
translation software to fill in the blanks. The information I provided opened
Lily’s eyes; it was an “Aha!” moment. Suddenly she could see what was going

on with Samuel. He wasn’t lazy. He didn’t need punishments and beatings. He
needed to learn how to control his race car brain. Lily was mentally agile
enough herself to “get it” right away, and to run with it.
Once we had made the connection and established trust, the next key
element was education. Getting both parents and several teachers on board so
fast was, by comparison to what I’ve had to do in the United States,
breathtaking. Based on what I’d been told before going to China, I would
have expected the opposite.
But then creating the right environment, the stellar environment, at school
was crucial. That the school was willing to do everything I suggested reflects

fast was, by comparison to what I’ve had to do in the United States,
breathtaking. Based on what I’d been told before going to China, I would
have expected the opposite.
But then creating the right environment, the stellar environment, at school
was crucial. That the school was willing to do everything I suggested reflects
so very well on that school. Samuel would never have achieved the success he
did without that.
It was also important that they understood the “race car brain with bicycle
brakes” model of ADHD, because it is accurate but not shaming. It allowed
Samuel to aspire to become a champion if he worked on his brakes, but it
reminded him that there was work to be done. The key here was to use the
model consistently. Instead of saying “You’re a bad boy!” or “Shape up!” Lily
said, “Your brakes are failing you.” She still intervened, making it clear that
certain behaviors needed to stop or change, but she did not do this via shame.
This is critical to the long-term growth and success of the child. Shame is the
most disabling learning disability.
The cerebellar exercises were the main, indeed the only, strictly
therapeutic intervention I used with Samuel. They worked wonders. In all
honesty, I was amazed to see how rapidly he progressed. Now, nearly three
years later, I’m still in touch with Lily. She tells me the progress continues,
and Samuel is thriving.
How much did all this mean to him? So much that chocolate became too
precious to eat. I can’t imagine a seven-year-old expressing pride more
ardently than that.
S N
*1 The difference is not so big as to contribute to a diagnostic test, but it’s a big enough
difference, in large group aggregates of MRIs, to be significant and worthy of further study.

*2 Full disclosure: Dr. Hallowell wrote the introduction to Belgau’s memoir about his life’s
work, A Life in Balance.

I

CHAPTER 4
The Healing Power of Connection
n 1985, Dr. Vincent Felitti, then chief of preventive medicine at Kaiser
Permanente in San Diego, was running an obesity clinic for women and
getting pretty good results. However, he kept seeing a recurring phenomenon
he couldn’t explain. A large number of patients who were doing well would
drop out short of their goal, despite having started to successfully lose weight.
A woman who needed to lose 300 pounds would lose 100 of those pounds
but then, for no apparent reason or given explanation, abruptly drop out of the
program.
A naturally curious man, Dr. Felitti decided to interview these women in
more detail. He needed to know what was going on. One of the questions he
asked in this deeper dive was “How old were you when you had your first
sexual experience?” However, one day, tired from so many interviews, Dr.
Felitti misspoke and asked one woman what he thought was a ridiculous
question the minute it left his lips: “How much did you weigh when you had
your first sexual experience?” It turned out instead to be the most important
question he ever asked; it made medical history.
To Felitti’s surprise, the woman did not find the question ridiculous at all.
Painful in the extreme, to be sure, but not ridiculous. “Forty pounds. I was

four years old and it was with my father,” she replied, and then she burst into
tears.
This was only the second case of incest Dr. Felitti had ever encountered,
so he didn’t expect to encounter many more. But he was intrigued by the
possible connection between trauma and weight management so he added this
question to his regular interview script. The more women he asked, the more
common were reports not only of incest but of an array of other kinds of
sexual abuse in their histories.
It turned out that many women dropped out of Dr. Felitti’s weight loss
program because losing weight made them feel unbearably anxious and
vulnerable. Their girth helped them to feel safe, beyond a man’s desire to
assault them. So, even though they knew that their obesity put them at risk for
disease, they did not want to give up the protection they felt it afforded them.
Felitti’s accidental discovery led to a landmark study, one of the largest
and most important public health surveys ever undertaken. Between 1995 and
1997, researchers interviewed some seventeen thousand subjects, all in the
Kaiser Permanente HMO. These were largely white, upper-middle-class,
college-educated San Diegoans who had good doctors, so the findings could
not be attributed to poverty or lack of access to top-notch medical care. The
researchers asked ten probing questions about incidents of emotional or
physical trauma or abuse (including witnessing something traumatic or being
the victim of it), exposure to drug or alcohol use (that is, being in the
presence of an adult who abused these substances), and familial mental
health. The results were startling: Two-thirds reported one experience on
what’s come to be called the Adverse Childhood Experience Scale, or ACEs.
Twenty percent reported three or more experiences, and 13 percent reported
four or more.
Since that initial finding, the Centers for Disease Control has continued
this study, and the ACEs test has become a standard screening tool in many
medical practices. That’s because it can predict problems in adult health, both
physical and mental: A score of four or more correlates with a 390 percent

Since that initial finding, the Centers for Disease Control has continued
this study, and the ACEs test has become a standard screening tool in many
medical practices. That’s because it can predict problems in adult health, both
physical and mental: A score of four or more correlates with a 390 percent
increase in chronic pulmonary disease; a 240 percent increase in liver disease;
a 460 percent increase in depression; and a 1,220 percent increase in suicide
attempts. Even a score of one correlates with a marked increase in adult
alcoholism, depression, and divorce.

Dr. Vivek Murthy, the nineteenth Surgeon General of the United States
and author of the book Together: The Healing Power of Connection in a
Sometimes Lonely World, named another adverse condition—loneliness—the
number one medical problem in the country. In a Harvard Business Review
essay, he said:
During my years caring for patients, the most common pathology I
saw was not heart disease or diabetes; it was loneliness. Loneliness
and weak social connections are associated with a reduction in
lifespan similar to that caused by smoking fifteen cigarettes a day and
even greater than that associated with obesity. Loneliness is also
associated with a greater risk of cardiovascular disease, dementia,
depression, and anxiety. At work, loneliness reduces task
performance, limits creativity, and impairs other aspects of executive
function such as reasoning and decision making. For our health and
our work, it is imperative that we address the loneliness epidemic
quickly.
Why this matters so much in our story of ADHD is because, as you
probably can guess, ACEs scores run much higher in families where there is
ADHD, either in a parent or in a child, or both. Because the negative side of
ADHD, the bad brakes, causes impulsive behavior often out of control, the
parent is more likely to mistreat or abuse his child, and the child is more
likely to provoke, alienate, or assault his parent. It’s a dangerous setup on both
sides, parent and child.
LOVE HEALS
If there was ever any doubt, the ACEs study proves once and for all that bad
stuff in childhood—abuse, neglect, violence, drug use, loneliness, poverty,
chaos—begets really bad stuff in adulthood. But there is an equally clear
antidote. Connection, positive connection, which at its most distilled is called
love, has incredible healing power.

The Columbia University professor and psychiatrist Kelli Harding
gathered much of the research into the power of love and connection in her
2019 book, The Rabbit Effect. The title derives from a study on rabbits who
were fed a high-fat diet to show the effect of high cholesterol on the health of
the heart. Not surprisingly, the rabbits showed large deposits of fat in their
coronary arteries on autopsy. They had not been healthy.
Except for one anomalous group of rabbits that showed 60 percent fewer
fatty deposits than all the others. Same diet, same strain of rabbits, same lab,
same age, but this one group had markedly lower deposits of fat in their
hearts. It was a complete mystery to the investigators.
Being good scientists, they looked further for an explanation. The salient
variable that ended up explaining the difference had nothing to do with diet,
exercise, genetics, or any of the other standard reasons a scientist might
expect.
The explanation lay in the kindness shown to those rabbits by the lab

Being good scientists, they looked further for an explanation. The salient
variable that ended up explaining the difference had nothing to do with diet,
exercise, genetics, or any of the other standard reasons a scientist might
expect.
The explanation lay in the kindness shown to those rabbits by the lab
technician who managed their group. She handled the rabbits in her care
affectionately, talking to them and petting them while she fed them and
cleaned their cages. She doted on them as a loving owner dotes on favorite
pets. She was no mere lab tech, she was a purveyor of love. Love made the
difference.
In humans, a famous research project known as the Grant Study—in
which researchers from Harvard Medical School studied 268 Harvard College
sophomores from the classes of 1939 through 1944 and followed them for the
rest of their lives—was brought to prominence by Harvard’s George Vaillant
through his forty years of monitoring the study. Under a new lead researcher,
Harvard psychiatrist Robert Waldinger, the study is still under way today,
making it the longest-running longitudinal study of adult development ever
done. Its main conclusion is beautifully and compellingly simple. The single
most important factor in predicting health, longevity, occupational success,
income, leadership ability, and general happiness comes down to one four-
letter word. “It’s love,” Vaillant famously stated. “Full stop.”
In his summary of the Grant Study findings, published in Triumphs of
Experience: The Men of the Harvard Grant Study, Vaillant wrote about one of
the most important lessons from the study, that in order for love to work its
most sustaining magic, the individual who is loved must be able to receive the

love, to metabolize it, to use Vaillant’s word. Even if you had a loveless
childhood and feel empty at age twenty-five, by age seventy-five you can feel
fulfilled and content if you’ve learned how to take love in rather than push it
away.
Dr. Hallowell can personally attest to the truth of Vaillant’s finding. His
ACEs score is eight. Given the increased risks for a score as low as four, an
eight obviously puts him at great risk. He ought to be alienated from his
children, depressed, alcoholic, out of work, lonely and sick, and near death’s
door.
Instead, he has enjoyed more than thirty-three happy years of marriage
and raised three well-adjusted and treasured children; he is seventy-one
healthy years old at this writing.
Statistically speaking, Dr. Hallowell is an outlier: He has beaten extreme
odds. But he knows why he beat the odds, and he knows why almost every
person like him beats the odds: the unsurpassed power of positive connection
—Vitamin Connect, or, as we like to say, “the other vitamin C.” In his case,
he had a particularly loving and magical connection with his grandmother,
whom he called Gammy. Aware of his hardships and sensitive to his needs,
she seemed to make it her mission to give him safe haven. Their time
together was both memorable and precious. As he puts it:
Gammy could turn peeling a hardboiled egg into a surgical search for
a Golden Kingdom called Yolk. She could turn a rainy day into a
festival, a croquet mallet into a Queen’s scepter. She could take a
disappointed boy, upset by unkind words from a friend, and turn that
boy into a barrel of laughs in two shakes of a lamb’s tail, to use one of
her favorite expressions. She could elevate the lowliest day to the

a Golden Kingdom called Yolk. She could turn a rainy day into a
festival, a croquet mallet into a Queen’s scepter. She could take a
disappointed boy, upset by unkind words from a friend, and turn that
boy into a barrel of laughs in two shakes of a lamb’s tail, to use one of
her favorite expressions. She could elevate the lowliest day to the
heights of delight. A visit to Gammy’s took on an electric charge the
moment it was announced.
FEELING UNDERSTOOD
Creating comfortable, positively connected environments is the most
important step in helping people of all ages get the most out of life in general;

the lack of connection particularly hurts people who have ADHD.
In his book The Globalization of Addiction, Bruce Alexander uses the
term “dislocation” (which was coined by the political economist Karl Polanyi)
to refer to the loss of “psychosocial integration.” Dislocation, he explains, is
psychologically toxic and untenable. An individual will crack in any number
of ways: disruptive behavior; extreme anxiety; withdrawal; school refusal; the
beginnings of substance use; depression and thoughts of suicide; the
development of an eating disorder; cutting; poor performance at work; loss of
job; marital difficulties. The dismal list goes on.
While Alexander’s focus is on addiction—of all kinds, including addiction
to screens—his words perfectly describe how many children with ADHD feel
in classrooms and adults with ADHD feel in the adult world. Misunderstood,
alienated, left out, on the outside looking in.
Sometimes literally on the outside. Dav Pilkey, the writer and illustrator
who created the beloved Captain Underpants series of books (and many other
children’s books), spent most of his elementary school years sitting alone
outside in the hallway after being paddled with a board by the principal. How
terrible it is that millions of children with ADHD suffer similarly from the
lack of sustaining connection simply because they are different, because their
minds run like race cars with bad brakes, and because others fail to
understand. Those of us with ADHD are usually pretty sensitive, so we begin
to put up defenses, and before you know it we’re loners, being teased, put off,
or, if we’re adults, not climbing the ladder, and people are wondering why,
and not in a helpful way.
The experience of living with this condition is like being part of an
invisible minority. Even if you do become visible, even if you do get
identified and treated, you usually still face prejudice: “Oh, he’s a Special Ed
kid.” “He’s a retard.” “He’s got ADHD, whatever that is.” “He takes
Adderall.” The stigma rules.
What we need—especially as children—is not punishment or ridicule;
what we need is free and easy to supply—Vitamin Connect. Without it, we
feel more and more separate, alone, and apart. “Psychosocial integration”
may be a cumbersome term, but it connotes a warm and wonderful force
everyone can understand and every child and every adult in every organization

What we need—especially as children—is not punishment or ridicule;
what we need is free and easy to supply—Vitamin Connect. Without it, we
feel more and more separate, alone, and apart. “Psychosocial integration”
may be a cumbersome term, but it connotes a warm and wonderful force
everyone can understand and every child and every adult in every organization

ought to get many doses of every day. It should be the lifeblood of all
families, schools, and organizations.
Peter, as we’ll call him, is typical of the patients we see in our consulting
practices, and the outline of his story points up the tremendous importance of
connection. When he was sixteen and in tenth grade, he came to Dr.
Hallowell’s office with his parents. By all accounts—his parents’ and his
teachers’—he was very smart and hugely talented, but he had trouble finishing
assignments, so his grades didn’t show it. He felt his teachers were often well-
meaning, but he also felt beaten down from the effort of toeing the line all the
time at school. He believed he was “stupid,” and he generally lacked
motivation for the school he had come to hate. Were it not for his likely-
ADHD pediatrician father and his smart neuroscientist mom, he would have
been a candidate for residential treatment. They believed in their son and
stayed connected with him as they tried to help him find his way.
As Peter discussed with Dr. Hallowell what really interested him, it
became clear that he was happiest when making things out of wood. The
family hatched a plan: Peter would go to the local vocational tech school in
his area for eleventh grade, and Peter’s father agreed to set up a woodworking
shop in their basement so that Peter could explore that talent fully. There
were other strategies, too—he tried cerebellar stimulation treatment (see
chapter 3), and he and Dr. Hallowell discussed the nature of the brain’s
default mode network (see chapter 2) and how it was contributing to Peter’s
brooding and rumination. Lastly, Dr. Hallowell prescribed the use of a
medication off-label (Amantadine—see chapter 8), which he believed could
help Peter when the other meds he’d tried hadn’t. Dr. Hallowell made clear
that the road ahead would not be smooth for Peter, but with his parents’ belief
in him, and now a warm connection with Dr. Hallowell, Peter reported to his
mother (who later reported it to Dr. Hallowell) that he was at last feeling
understood, and for the first time in the longest while, feeling hopeful.
In first grade, one amazing teacher gave her understanding—a powerful
antidote to dislocation—to Dr. Hallowell himself:
In first grade I couldn’t read. At reading period we’d take turns
reading out loud, “See Spot run, run, run, run, up, up, up, down,
down, down.” Simple. But I couldn’t read that. I had dyslexia. Back

In first grade, one amazing teacher gave her understanding—a powerful
antidote to dislocation—to Dr. Hallowell himself:
In first grade I couldn’t read. At reading period we’d take turns
reading out loud, “See Spot run, run, run, run, up, up, up, down,
down, down.” Simple. But I couldn’t read that. I had dyslexia. Back

then, unless you had a wise teacher, you were called slow, which
meant stupid, and so they skipped you when it was your turn to read.
But my teacher, Mrs. Eldredge, was wise. She didn’t skip me. She’d
just come over and sit down next to me when it was my turn to read,
and she’d put her arm around me and pull me in close to her. As I
would stammer and stutter through “up, up, up,” none of the kids
would laugh at me because I had the mafia sitting next to me. Mrs.
Eldredge’s arm was my treatment plan. She gave me psychosocial
integration. Every day.
It was brilliant. It was all she could do—she couldn’t cure my
dyslexia and they didn’t have an Orton-Gillingham tutor
* 
in the school
—but it was all she needed to do. With that arm—with the power of
connection—she cured the real learning disabilities, which are fear,
and shame, and believing that you can’t do something. To this day I
am a painfully slow reader—my wife teasingly says she can’t believe I
know anything—but I read well enough to have majored in English at
Harvard, to have graduated with high honors, and to make part of my
living now by writing books, none of which would have happened
without Mrs. Eldredge and the loving connection her arm gave me.
We know all too well that you sink without enough connection, no matter
how unsinkable you may think you are. Too many people don’t tap into the
power of connection nearly as much as they should because they claim to be
too busy for connection, or they trivialize its power. But the deeper reason
that some people avoid connection is that they fear it. They fear it because
they’ve connected before and been hurt in a way they never want to be hurt
again.
We say to them, and maybe to you, Take heart. Hearts heal. Unlike the
ship synonymous with sinking, the titanic power of connection rises up from
the deep every time it sinks, as long as we are brave enough to board her
again. Once she knows we are ready to jump on, she rises, ready to welcome
us once more.
We ought, all of us, to tap more often into the power of connection.
Multitudinous science supports doing so. It only makes sense. How would you
feel if you were criticized all day long, as so many of these children are? Fear

is the major learning disability, fear and shame. We humans ignore
connection until we nearly perish due to its absence. We are living in a
massive Vitamin Connect deficiency.
TIPS FOR A RICHLY CONNECTED LIFE
Create for your child, for yourself, for your family, for your organization, for
your community, for this country, and for this world if you possibly can, a
connected life. It is the key to pretty much everything good in life. And it is,
for the most part, free.
It’s how to keep a bad childhood from ruining your life. Even better,
developing positive connections is the best way to prevent a bad childhood.
Kindness makes kids grow, and adults as well. A deeply, variously
connected life is the most enriching gift you can give yourself and your
family. Connection comes in many forms. Here are more ideas—some pretty
obvious and others a little off-the-wall—for using the amazing power of

developing positive connections is the best way to prevent a bad childhood.
Kindness makes kids grow, and adults as well. A deeply, variously
connected life is the most enriching gift you can give yourself and your
family. Connection comes in many forms. Here are more ideas—some pretty
obvious and others a little off-the-wall—for using the amazing power of
connection in your life or your child’s. Add to this list in your own off-the-
wall ways:
Make a point of having meals with your family—family dinners have
been proven to work wonders, even to improve SAT scores—and have
meals with other people you know. It’s wonderful to introduce children to
people from out of town, even from out of the country, and make dinner
a big deal where people meet to eat and greet. The more you do this, the
more meals turn into events that take on meaning beyond merely a
chance to refuel.
Unless you or someone in your family is allergic, or your physical layout
makes it impossible, get a pet! We are biased toward man’s best friend—
dogs—because of their companionability and their obvious, freely given
love for their owners. But a cat, guinea pig, parrot, hamster, ferret, turtle,
fish, or even a snake provides both a focus of our love and a sense of it in
return. Pets give us “the other vitamin C” as no other being can.

Make a daily stop at a favorite coffee shop with hellos all around. And
get into the habit of giving hellos and nods to people you don’t know.
This kind of passing acknowledgment gives a quick dose of Vitamin
Connect, and it prods you out of the habit of anonymity most of us slip
into.
Do the same thing at your favorite gas station. Of course, first you’ll have
to designate a favorite gas station and frequent it. But just imagine how
much more fun it will be to fill up your car instead of dreading the cost
and the lame feeling you have standing there pumping your gas,
wondering whether this is all there is to life. If you actually knew the
people at the station and you talked with them and turned the stop into a
meaningful moment? Win-win!
Keep up with at least two good friends regularly. This is even better than
going to the gym every day! One way to do this is to have a standing
lunch date or a time reserved for a catch-up phone call every week. Soon
you will really look forward to this regular shot in the arm of love and
familiarity.
Plan a sleepover for your child. Or invite your own grandchild for the
night. Having extended, agenda-free (except for play!) time with another
young person (or a young person, if you’re the grandparent) is hugely
restorative and connective.
Reserve at least a half hour of uninterrupted one-on-one time with your
child every week, no agenda, doing whatever your child wants as long as
it’s safe, legal, and not too expensive. Child psychiatrist Dr. Peter Metz
calls this “special time,” and he says it works magic on the parent-child
relationship and for a child’s sense of belonging and love.
Join some kind of group that holds meetings—a book club, a lecture
series, a knitting circle. Then attend those meetings! The MacArthur
Foundation Study on Aging showed this to be one of the two factors most
associated with long life (the other is frequency of visits with friends).
Clear yourself of pent-up anger and resentment—that is, practice
forgiveness of others and of yourself. Do this as often as you fill up your
car with gas. There is no one way to do this; you’ll have to find a way that

Foundation Study on Aging showed this to be one of the two factors most
associated with long life (the other is frequency of visits with friends).
Clear yourself of pent-up anger and resentment—that is, practice
forgiveness of others and of yourself. Do this as often as you fill up your
car with gas. There is no one way to do this; you’ll have to find a way that
works for you. One example: You say to yourself, He was a son of a
bitch, but I am not going to waste one more second of my precious life

being angry at him. Forgiveness does not mean that you condone the
deed, just that you renounce the hold that anger has over you.
Take a daily inventory of gratitude. This sounds corny, but it feels really
good. Whether you make a written list or just take the time to go over
what you’re grateful for in your mind, you come away feeling lighter and
more optimistic.
Make a point of paying compliments. This may feel awkward, but how
much do you love it when someone notices and comments on something
good about you? Give that kindness back and you will likewise feel
good!
Engage in some kind of spiritual practice, whether as an individual or in
a group. It doesn’t have to be organized religion, just some framework for
entertaining and sharing the Big Questions, Ideas, Uncertainties,
Possibilities, and Hopes. Finding the right group is key, but once you do
find such a connection, it will reach into, enlighten, and warm many areas
of your life.
Go for a walk in nature alone or with a friend (and preferably with that
dog we want you to adopt!).
Never worry alone. This one is key. Of course, choose with care the
people you worry with. But when you worry with the right person, worry
quickly turns into a chance to problem-solve and sometimes even a
chance to laugh—releasing your worries—together.
Minimize your consumption of news if it tends to upset you or rile you
up. If you feel more connected to the world through watching it,
however, don’t give it up!
Visit graveyards—whether someone you love is interred there or not.
Strolling around a cemetery can cast a special spell, making us feel
reverent and quiet, and often strangely rejuvenated.
Whatever you’re wrestling with, take a bow for working so hard to be a
better person. In other words, connect with your desire to improve and
give yourself credit for trying to do that.
Connect with your personal vision of greatness and try to hold it in your
consciousness every day as a guide and inspiration. One way to do this is

to identify one living person you admire, then allow that admiration to
lift you up.
Learn about your ancestors. You can do this either through archival
research or asking questions of your elders. Asking questions has the
added bonus of connecting you to those elders.
Along the same lines, talk to non-related old people about their lives, in
detail. This is like reading a great novel.
Visit the local fire department if you can, and talk to a fireman about his
job. Firemen love to talk, and they tend to be great connectors.
Climb a tree and sit on a branch for at least ten minutes; it gives you a
point of view on the world you rarely can achieve and, chances are,
haven’t seen since you were ten years old. Don’t have a tree (or the ability
to climb one)? Try sitting in the middle of a town square or on a bench
along a busy walkway. You’ll be amazed at who and what you see passing
by if you spend the time to just observe. Doing this doesn’t necessarily

point of view on the world you rarely can achieve and, chances are,
haven’t seen since you were ten years old. Don’t have a tree (or the ability
to climb one)? Try sitting in the middle of a town square or on a bench
along a busy walkway. You’ll be amazed at who and what you see passing
by if you spend the time to just observe. Doing this doesn’t necessarily
connect you to another individual, but rather to the humanity passing by.
Associate with dream makers. Avoid dream breakers. Cynics may be
funny and entertaining, but they tend to drain you of hope. As Oscar
Wilde said, a cynic is one who “knows the price of everything, and the
value of nothing.”
Always be on the lookout for the person who can provide for your child
(or for you) what you can’t.
Be on the lookout for any charismatic mentor. Many studies show that
charismatic mentors—not grades, study habits, where they go to school,
or IQ—make the biggest difference in kids with ADHD and VAST. If
they can find a teacher, coach, family friend, or anyone else who
understands and inspires them, then the sky truly is the limit.
S N
* Orton-Gillingham is a multisensory phonics approach to teaching reading.

M

CHAPTER 5
Find Your Right Difficult
ost people who have ADHD or VAST are naturally creative and
original. They think along unusual lines and feel a persistent drive to build,
develop, or create something, anything, from a business to a boat to a book to
a balustrade. It’s like an omnipresent itch to make something.
If that itch goes unscratched, we tend to feel listless or depressed,
unmotivated and at sea. If we pour our energies into something that is
beneath our creative abilities, we tend to lose interest. Remember, boredom =
kryptonite. If we find ourselves in a job that doesn’t draw on that creative
strength but instead demands a skill set we just don’t have, we will falter—
and we’ll feel the crush of that defeat harder than others do. But once we find
an outlet for our creativity that is a Goldilocks kind of just right, once we find
a project to sink our teeth into, then presto! we light up like a Christmas tree.
What’s your outlet, your child’s instrument, stage, or tool? What’s your
right kind of difficult?
TAPPING INTO SUPERPOWER

Being syndromes of matched opposite characteristics—with an upside to
every perceived downside—ADHD and VAST are unique among conditions
in the behavioral sciences. Not recognizing this fact is the chief reason the
strengths associated with ADHD/VAST got ignored for so long: Doctors tend
to look for pathology and focus on problem behaviors. Which is to say, they
often ignore strengths.
Of course, it’s true that most people who have ADHD or VAST are really
bad at quite a few things (in which their noses get rubbed all the time), but
usually they are, or could be, truly exceptional at one or two other activities.
Toward that end, we take a strength-based approach to treating people in our
practices. As we like to say, we do not treat disabilities, we help people
unwrap their gifts. More exuberantly: We help identify superpowers!
Some people just luck into this outcome—one thing leads to another that
reveals that superpower. To wit: Consider the journey of a man we’ll call
Allen. When he was in high school, Allen’s motivation for getting a summer
job was to have enough money to go on dates. He didn’t have much patience
for filling out the requisite job applications, though—a bugaboo for those of
us with ADHD, to be sure—but luckily for him an opportunity fell in his lap.
As it happened, a local rug cleaning company had a phone number one digit
away from his family’s phone number, so his house received a lot of wrong-
number calls looking for the rug cleaning company. Instead of being annoyed
at all the calls, the way most people would be, Allen’s mind lit up. Only
fourteen years old at the time, he saw a business opportunity. When a wrong-
number call would come in, Allen would answer and say in his most
charming, enthusiastic voice, “This is not the rug cleaning company you are
looking for, but I can do a better job cleaning your rug than they can, and I
will charge you a lower price!” He saw an opportunity where almost no one
else would have, and he had the innate genius to grab it. It all happened in a
flash, and before Allen knew it, he had himself a business.
Unfortunately, Allen wasn’t old enough to drive (and he didn’t have access
to a car anyway), so he reached out to an older friend who had a car, and the
two of them rented a rug cleaning machine. They’d go to the houses of the
people who’d called the wrong number and accepted the invitation to try

flash, and before Allen knew it, he had himself a business.
Unfortunately, Allen wasn’t old enough to drive (and he didn’t have access
to a car anyway), so he reached out to an older friend who had a car, and the
two of them rented a rug cleaning machine. They’d go to the houses of the
people who’d called the wrong number and accepted the invitation to try
Allen’s offer, and soon he and his partner were making $400 to $700, after
expenses, every weekend, in 1975 dollars.

Allen continued to discover opportunities where others wouldn’t see them.
One day he was cleaning the rugs in a local professor’s office when he noticed
a piece of equipment stored there. Being naturally curious, as most people
with ADHD or VAST tend to be, he asked what the equipment was for. It
turned out that it was an old machine for editing film. On another visit to
clean this professor’s rugs, Allen saw someone cleaning the machine and
asked if he could watch the process. When Allen saw that taking the machine
apart, cleaning the lens, and reassembling it all was pretty simple, he decided
to try to get into the film machinery cleaning field as well. This interest (and
skill—turns out Allen could get the job done for $150 less than his
competition!) led Allen to get a job with a local film production company
and, in turn, to meet a number of well-known Bostonians, including the
celebrity chef Julia Child and the famous Boston Celtic Larry Bird.
Wouldn’t you know—at the time, the then governor of Massachusetts
needed asbestos removed from a house he wanted to buy, and a realtor asked
Allen about it, since Allen seemed to know a little something about cleaning
all kinds of things. Rather than saying he didn’t know (which would have
been the truth), Allen took a three-day course on removing asbestos. He got a
summer job with an asbestos removal company between eleventh and twelfth
grades and removed the asbestos from the house the governor was to buy.
Allen worked hard at all these odd jobs, and people seemed to love his
can-do, figure-it-out spirit. Soon he added still more skills to his résumé. At
one point he met a family who owned a dog grooming business and went to
work for them. Through dog grooming he met a number of wealthy people in
the suburbs, one of whom ran an au pair company, and she hired Allen to be
a tour guide for every new au pair that summer.
Allen is now in his fifties and a successful businessman in the asbestos
removal sector. But he’s still as creative and nimble as ever. He recently got
his first patent approved, for a dustless dumpster system!
Allen’s superpower is that he’s a problem solver. And as long as he is
intellectually challenged by the problem and is meeting interesting people and
learning how things work, there’s almost no one better at turning chance into
opportunity.
Sometimes someone finds their superpower through this kind of serial
entrepreneurship, but other times it might best be described as a kind of

intellectually challenged by the problem and is meeting interesting people and
learning how things work, there’s almost no one better at turning chance into
opportunity.
Sometimes someone finds their superpower through this kind of serial
entrepreneurship, but other times it might best be described as a kind of

“lightning strike” of one particular interest. For instance, we know a professor
at an Ivy League university whom we would identify as having VAST
characteristics, if not diagnosed ADHD. When he was in college, he tells us,
he couldn’t find anything that interested him, so he seriously considered
dropping out to become a ski bum.
Bags packed, he was ready to leave the small college he was attending
when a girl he knew asked him to come to a physics lecture with her. He had
absolutely no interest in physics—science basically bored him, especially
compared to skiing—but he did like the girl, so he agreed to attend one last
lecture before quitting college for good.
Less than a minute into the physics lecture he’d forgotten all about his
date and was totally engrossed in the topic at hand. That one lecture opened
up a torrent of interest, curiosity, and innate brilliance—a superpower—for a
subject he had previously known nothing about. He went on to become one of
the luminaries in the field.
Lightning like this does strike, and it isn’t all that rare, either. We who
have ADHD or VAST characteristics tend to fall in love in a hurry—with a
person, with a subject, with a project, with a deal, with a plan. Sparks fly, and
before you know it, we’ve forgotten how lost and forlorn we were because
we’re immersed in whatever it was that caught our attention.
But it’s often the case that the identification of your superpower will take
concerted effort, and perhaps some trial and error with challenges.
ASSESSING YOUR STRENGTHS
People with ADHD and VAST need a challenge. As we’ve said, boredom is
our kryptonite. The trick, though, is not just to find a challenge—after all,
digging a hole and filling it up is a challenge—but to find the right challenge.
We call that the right difficult. One proactive way to pinpoint your right
difficult is to develop a practical inventory of your strengths—what you are
good at.
A simple way to start is to sit down with your child, or, if you’re an adult,
sit down with your spouse or some other adult (it’s best to do this with

another person, as the interaction makes for more creative, spontaneous,
playful, and thorough answers), and respond to the following questions. Have
the person asking the questions write down your answers, because this is an
important document to save:
1. What three or four things are you best at doing?
2. What three or four things do you like doing the most?
3. What three or four activities or achievements have brought you the most
praise in your life?
4. What are your three or four most cherished goals?
5. What three or four things would you most like to get better at?
6. What do others praise you for but you take for granted?
7. What, if anything, is easy for you but hard for others?
8. What do you spend a lot of time doing that you are really bad at?
9. What could your teacher or supervisor do so that your time could be
spent more productively?
10. If you weren’t afraid of getting in trouble, what would you tell your
teacher or supervisor that he or she doesn’t understand about you?
The answers to these ten questions reveal a lot. This information is gold.

9. What could your teacher or supervisor do so that your time could be
spent more productively?
10. If you weren’t afraid of getting in trouble, what would you tell your
teacher or supervisor that he or she doesn’t understand about you?
The answers to these ten questions reveal a lot. This information is gold.
Armed with it, you can more productively talk with your child’s teacher or
your own employer to try to create a better learning or working environment.
If you are the parent of a child with ADHD or VAST characteristics,
bring this brief assessment inventory to your child’s school. Most of the time
these children have files full of negative comments or failures. It’s good to get
positives into the record. It’s also essential that the teacher know what your
child’s interests are—from dinosaurs to planets to sports to horses to
videogames—so that he or she can come up with side projects to keep your
child interested. This can be crucial, because a major reason kids with
attention issues do poorly in school is that they feel bored, which in turn leads
the teacher to believe they don’t care about schoolwork. If the teacher can
work your child’s interests into the curriculum (or just allow your child to
pursue them during downtime), your child is likely to show a whole new level
of interest in school. This creates a positive feedback loop—your child’s

interest and attention in class may lead the teacher to more often give her or
him the benefit of the doubt instead of assuming the worst or having a knee-
jerk reaction to distracted behavior. The profile this short strengths
assessment generates can also become part of your child’s school file and be
referred to by other teachers, specialists, and administrators when questions
come up about their interests—or lack of interests—in future years.
For adults, this strengths assessment can be the starting point for looking
for a new job or reevaluating your current one. As a guiding principle, you
ought to spend the majority of your working hours at the intersection of three
circles: the circle of all the things you really like to do, the circle of all the
things you’re really good at doing, and the circle of things that someone will
pay you to do. You can use this strengths assessment to help you organize
your thinking to find that intersection, that special zone where you ought to
spend as much of your working day as you possibly can, because that’s where
you will do your best work and be happiest doing it.
GET TO KNOW YOUR STRENGTHS IN A WHOLE NEW
WAY
Armed with awareness of your strengths, you’re ready for the next test, one of
the most powerful you can take, even if you’ve never heard of it: the Kolbe
Index.
If you want to know what strengths you’ve always known you had but
likely have never named, take this test. If you also want to know why some
tasks have seemed all but impossible to you even though they come easily to
others, take this test. If you want to know where your “sweet spot” is, where
you ought to spend most of your time, in what kind of work, take this test.
The Kolbe test was developed by a brilliant and fearless pioneer named
Kathy Kolbe. She’d grown up around test development—her father developed
the Wonderlic Personnel Test (now known as the Wonderlic Contemporary
Cognitive Ability Test), which is given to all incoming NFL players—but it
wasn’t until after graduating from Northwestern University that Kathy threw

The Kolbe test was developed by a brilliant and fearless pioneer named
Kathy Kolbe. She’d grown up around test development—her father developed
the Wonderlic Personnel Test (now known as the Wonderlic Contemporary
Cognitive Ability Test), which is given to all incoming NFL players—but it
wasn’t until after graduating from Northwestern University that Kathy threw
her own intellectual interest into figuring out why smart people aren’t more

productive or creative. She saw what IQ tests and other personality
assessments didn’t quite get at: that how a person exerts effort is defining. So
she started work on an assessment tool that would unearth the unique and
inborn way that each of us exerts effort or takes action. This, she reasoned,
would show us a person’s conative style. Stemming from the Latin word
conatus, which means “effort,” the dictionary definition of “conation” is “the
mental faculty of purpose, desire, or will to perform an action; volition.”
That’s what Kathy wanted to investigate and assess, because after all, what
are the strengths that matter most but the strengths that lead to action? Much
more important than IQ, which is, from a practical standpoint, irrelevant,
your conative style determines what you actually do in life. Borrowing again
from the Latin, Kolbe calls this our MO, our modus operandi. And, for our
purposes, that’s what a person who has ADHD most needs to learn about
herself or himself and why we so strongly recommend taking this test.
Over the years, Kolbe has developed her test and refined it, administering
it to thousands upon thousands of individuals. It has now been validated in
more than 1.6 million case studies over forty years.
Here’s how Kathy explains it:
There’s a part of the mind that you don’t hear a lot about. It’s what
some people call “instincts” or that “gut feeling” when you’re making
a decision. Our secret: We know what natural strengths—instincts—
you were born with, and how you can use those strengths to be the
most productive, stress-free version of yourself.
There’s something already inside you that can rid the stress from
your life, help your relationships, and change the way you interact in
the workplace. These strengths are proven to remain unchanging in
long-term test-retest reliability studies.
If you’re over sixteen, take the Kolbe A Index. If you’re between ten and
sixteen, look for the Kolbe Y Index.
* 
Both of these trademarked tests are
quick, easy, thirty-six-question assessments with no wrong answers. After you
answer the questions, the test will generate a score comprised of four digits
between one and ten. These numbers represent your innate aptitude in four

areas of action, which Kolbe calls Fact Finder, Follow Thru, Quick Start, and
Implementor.
As an example of what these numbers mean, let’s take a closer look at Dr.
Hallowell’s Kolbe Index score: 5, 3, 9, 2.
Dr. Hallowell’s Fact Finder tendency score is 5. This relates to how he
naturally gathers or shares information. Being a 5, he is right in the middle,
what’s called an accommodator. In other words, he tends to get all the facts or
just go with a summary; consistently doing either one would be stressful for
him. Most people with ADHD or VAST have low scores in Fact Finder
(which does not mean bad; there are no bad scores on a Kolbe test) because
their natural talent lies in their ability to cut to the chase and summarize

what’s called an accommodator. In other words, he tends to get all the facts or
just go with a summary; consistently doing either one would be stressful for
him. Most people with ADHD or VAST have low scores in Fact Finder
(which does not mean bad; there are no bad scores on a Kolbe test) because
their natural talent lies in their ability to cut to the chase and summarize
information instead of digging into details.
Dr. Hallowell’s Follow Thru score is 3. This denotes how he instinctively
deals with the need for organization and processes. Being a 3, he is
technically “resistant” in Follow Thru, which is typical of people with ADHD
or VAST. In other words, they take shortcuts and let solutions evolve as they
work on problems instead of planning an approach in advance.
Dr. Hallowell’s Quick Start score is 9. This relates to how he approaches
risk and uncertainty. With a 9 in Quick Start, he is “insistent” in this way, and
that makes him like most people with ADHD or VAST. They jump right in
without testing the waters first. Remember: fire, ready, aim.
The 2 in Dr. Hallowell’s score refers to his Implementor tendencies, or
how well he naturally deals with hands-on work and managing space. His
score of 2 suggests that he envisions rather than arranges and physically
protects the spaces in which he lives and works. Many people with ADHD or
VAST are at the other end of this scale. They need to move and create
movement as they work. They need to create physical, hand-built solutions to
problems.
The Kolbe website explains this scoring system in detail, helping you
make sense of where you stand and pointing you toward where you might
focus your energies. As with anything worthwhile, you’ll have to do some
work to get the value. This is not a parlor trick. But the work you put in—
we’re talking a half hour to an hour—will pay off in a big way. Once you
unlock the secrets those numbers contain, you will understand yourself in a
much deeper and more helpful way.

Once you identify your strengths, using our short set of questions or
taking the Kolbe test to learn about your MO, you’re well on your way to the
great prize of finding the right difficult.
NO, THANKS, DOC, I’LL TAKE THE REALLY HARD WAY
(AKA WHAT’S UP WITH SELF-DEFEATING BEHAVIOR?)
It’s a funny thing about those of us who have ADHD. We want what others
avoid. We like problems. We need the difficult. That’s because easy is boring.
We need the stimulation of intense challenge. But as we’ve said, a challenge
undertaken just for the sake of a challenge can be counterproductive at best,
self-defeating at worst. As one patient—let’s call him Jon—put it:
What drives me is, unfortunately, not what makes me happy. A way to
explain it is that the way my brain works is such that I constantly need
to be working on impossibly difficult projects. If I’m not doing that, I
get bored and restless. I told my wife that if you stuck me on a beach
for a week and forced me to relax, and took away my iPhone and my
pen and paper, after thirty minutes I’d start writing to-do lists and
business ideas using my own blood. But that is not what makes me
“happy” because such work is hard and stressful. So it’s sort of a
catch-22.
Either I’m doing what drives me, which is intense problem solving
every second I am awake, or I’m bored/anxious/don’t know what to do
with myself.
We hear explanations like Jon’s all the time, heroic tales of someone

business ideas using my own blood. But that is not what makes me
“happy” because such work is hard and stressful. So it’s sort of a
catch-22.
Either I’m doing what drives me, which is intense problem solving
every second I am awake, or I’m bored/anxious/don’t know what to do
with myself.
We hear explanations like Jon’s all the time, heroic tales of someone
grittily giving everything they’ve got in order to do what they find nearly
impossible for reasons that have nothing to do with fame, money, or material
gain. What drives this self-defeating narrative? A gut need to do the
extremely difficult.
Because it’s just not in the makeup of people with ADHD or VAST to
give up. Sticking to something is a terrific quality if the something is

productive and makes you happy or your life better. But sticking to something
just for the sake of sticking to it is a Sisyphean undertaking—pushing that old
boulder up the hill day after day only to have it roll back down the next. In
some way, people like Jon seem almost to enjoy the process of perpetual
failure, as if the real, hard truth of life is to be found in pain, suffering, and
defeat. Their victory is to be found in carrying on no matter what.
To compound the problem, people with ADHD or VAST tendencies
usually reject help. Of course, there is an upside to this trait—it’s called
nonconformity. Another, less polite way of saying it: People with attention
issues tend to have acute bullshit detectors. We hate hypocrisy maybe more
than any other human failing, and we can spot it a mile away. We don’t join
cults. That’s definitely a positive side of rejecting help.
But taken to the extreme, this is counterproductive. Rejecting help can
sabotage a person’s education, career, health, and relationships. As we’ve
stated earlier, it’s not uncommon for a young person or adult to say, “I’d
rather fail doing it my way than succeed with help.” A patient we’ll call Greg
tried to explain his resistance to accepting help with running his (struggling)
small business in a conversation with Dr. Hallowell:
: It’s just who I am. I’m an independent kind of guy. I’ve always been
like this.
. : But if I could connect you with a coach, someone who could
help you with the details like scheduling and prioritizing that are causing
you to fail, why not accept that help?
: Because then it wouldn’t be me who was succeeding. It would be me
with the coach.
. : But isn’t most success like that? I couldn’t have become a
doctor without the help of the teachers who taught me in medical school
and then the older doctors who coached me when I was a young doctor.
: That’s different. I should be able to run my bait and tackle shop on my
own. It’s not like I’m in medical school.
. : Running a small business is every bit as complicated as
medical school, if not more so. What is it about getting help that makes
you so uncomfortable?

and then the older doctors who coached me when I was a young doctor.
: That’s different. I should be able to run my bait and tackle shop on my
own. It’s not like I’m in medical school.
. : Running a small business is every bit as complicated as
medical school, if not more so. What is it about getting help that makes
you so uncomfortable?

: I don’t know, but it does. Doc, we had this exact same discussion when
you brought up the subject of trying medication. I just want to do this on
my own. I want to live my life my way, on my terms.
. : But I want to help you see how self-defeating that approach
is. Especially in today’s world. No one is independent. No one is self-
sufficient. We all depend on one another. The realistic goal in life is not to
be independent, but to be effectively interdependent. In other words, you
have to be able to give as well as get. That’s how successful people
operate. Why waste your time doing what you’re bad at? Hire someone
else to do that so you can do what you’re good at.
: That just goes totally against my grain.
. : Well, that grain is going to defeat you. That grain is going to
keep you from becoming the big success you could become. You have the
talent to become a major player in the fishing industry; lots of people who
know the business have told you that. You have the entrepreneur’s edge.
So use it! Don’t let this refusal to accept help keep you from the success
you could have.
Both of us have had this conversation with patients countless times. In our
experience, the refusal to accept help is the single biggest reason for a person
not to progress once an ADHD diagnosis has been made. That’s why it’s so
important to find the right difficult. As Jon and Greg and too many others’
experience shows, if it is the wrong difficult, we can spend years, even
decades, in frustrating and foolish pursuit of the impossible. (The same
principle holds for marriage and other relationships, by the way.)
Once you have assessed your strengths—either through our ten-question
assessment or through the Kolbe Index—you should have a better idea of the
overlap between what you’re good at and what you love to do. Neither of us
can coach you on doing your own right kind of difficult—that’s your own
unique genius at work. But we can coach you on how to make your
environment fertile soil for growing that talent once you identify it. That’s the
subject of the next chapter.
S N

* These tests, which require a fee, can be found at Kolbe.com/TakeA and Kolbe.com/TakeY.
A more specific Kolbe test is Kolbe’s OPgig career program (OPgig.com), which can help
pinpoint the right fit for your career.

F

CHAPTER 6
Create Stellar Environments
rom the moment the idea of what we now call ADHD came into
being, people wondered how much of it was caused by the environment and
how much changing the environment might help the problems that come with
it. Dr. Charles Bradley himself, the doctor who first gave a medication,
amphetamine, to children to treat what we now call ADHD in 1937, ran his
ward on principles of environmental engineering. In addition to medication,
he tried regulating the lighting and experimenting with the staff’s clothing—
all to see what various changes in their environment might do for his patients.
Now that we’ve expanded ADHD to include VAST characteristics, and
since, strictly speaking, medication is only for people who have diagnosed
ADHD, the following questions become all the more relevant: What
constitutes the best environment, or what we call a stellar environment, for a
person who has attention issues? And how much difference does creating
such an environment make?
THE IMPACT OF ENVIRONMENT

The short answer: Environment matters a great deal. All kinds of research
now makes clear that our environment—including our diet, exposure to
toxins, chronic stress, and many other factors—can change the way our genes
get “expressed.” In lay terms, that means how you live is a determinant of
whether or not you get a disease to which you are genetically predisposed. In
other words, your environment is a powerful tonic—for better and for worse.
Many adults never discover they have ADHD until their environment
dramatically changes. For example, when a woman gives birth to or adopts
her first child, the demands on her organizational skills coupled with a loss of
sleep (and, if she’s given birth, bodily changes) really upset the applecart of
her environment. Without the calm and order of her pre-baby life, she feels
frenzied and unproductive. Often Mom will be able to right the cart or find
new ways of instilling order and calm into her day. Eventually—and
especially when she gets some help and some good sleep—her productivity
and equanimity return. But sometimes what the world sees as garden-variety
new motherhood or “mommy brain” points to underlying ADHD, and only
the upheaval of an environmental change reveals it.
Another example is the change that comes from stepping onto the next
rung of school—whether in grade school or college or graduate school. Take
medical school, which we know all too well. Suddenly the student, who has
done so well in school that he or she got into medical school in the first place,
must cope with demands upon his or her brain like never before. The new
pace of learning—like trying to sip water from a firehose, it’s often said—
takes over everything, making it hard for the student to maintain his or her
previously healthy and helpful practices, sleep, nutrition, and regular exercise
among them. Maybe, like the new mother above, this student will find her
footing. Maybe she will not—and soon discover underlying ADHD, get
diagnosed, and get help. But this situation is a breeding ground for VAST as
well—a culturally induced state of mind that once turned on is hard to turn
off, especially if the environment remains unhealthy.
HOW TO ORGANIZE YOUR ENVIRONMENT

footing. Maybe she will not—and soon discover underlying ADHD, get
diagnosed, and get help. But this situation is a breeding ground for VAST as
well—a culturally induced state of mind that once turned on is hard to turn
off, especially if the environment remains unhealthy.
HOW TO ORGANIZE YOUR ENVIRONMENT

There are elements of your environment you obviously can’t control. A new
mother can’t ever fully control when her baby sleeps and wakes or when the
baby will need to be fed or held or changed. And new academic or career
challenges are what they are; you have to try to keep up. But there are things
in our environment that we absolutely can control, and if attention issues are
in play, you absolutely must. In addition to connection, exercise, and stress
reduction—which are so important that we cover them in other chapters (see
chapters 4 and 7)—there are five areas of your environment that we would
have you focus on for yourself or your child: daily structure, nutrition, sleep,
populate your world with positivity, and accept and find the right help.
Daily Structure
Creating structure isn’t something that usually comes naturally to someone
with ADHD or characteristics of VAST. Abiding by and learning to like it,
even less so. Indeed, structure is more likely something that you resist. Being
free and a nonconformist is, after all, in our bones. But there is almost no
more important and helpful lifestyle hack for us than engineering structure.
Structure provides the walls of the bobsled run. Without it you careen off into
disaster. Neglect it at your peril!
But don’t be intimidated by it. Take heart in knowing that you probably
already have some structure to your day in the form of daily habits: You
probably brush your teeth and shower most days, we trust you say please and
thank you, and with luck you put a napkin on your lap when you eat and take
your plate to the dishwasher or sink when you’re done. You have these good
habits because someone made a point of explaining their importance. If you
don’t have these good habits, it’s never too late to put them in place. You can
effect change for yourself in many other ways, too.
Let’s start with the proverbial low-hanging fruit: having a schedule and a
to-do list. Creating structure with these two age-old strategies will help you
plan, prioritize, be on time more often, and procrastinate less. Just the simple
act of sitting down to write or type out a schedule or to-do list will help,
because any and every time you itemize the tasks on your plate, you are
neurologically reinforcing their importance.

If you’re an adult, there is no shortage of scheduling and reminder
hardware (notebooks, sticky notes, handheld tape recorders) and software
(apps and alarms that notify you in advance of your having to be somewhere
or complete something), so there is really no excuse not to set up your own
simple (or elaborate) system. Paying attention to the notes and pings is
another story. How many times have we been alerted or reminded and,
because we’ve fully intended to follow through, turned the alarm or alert
off…only to realize hours later that our mind took off on another track and
we missed the proverbial (or literal) train? This happens to “neurotypicals”
too, but it’s an all-too-frequent hallmark of the ADHD mind for sure. The
trick is to set up backup reminders and systems—even in the form of asking a

off…only to realize hours later that our mind took off on another track and
we missed the proverbial (or literal) train? This happens to “neurotypicals”
too, but it’s an all-too-frequent hallmark of the ADHD mind for sure. The
trick is to set up backup reminders and systems—even in the form of asking a
partner or spouse to call or nudge you to help keep you on task.
But of course you can’t set up a reminder system for everything you need
to do—that might mean having an alarm or alert go off all day long (which is
not ideal for another reason—see below on turning off electronic devices)!
And it’s not good for partner or spousal dynamics to ask another person to be
the perpetual nag. Instead, start small: Pick one or two regularly scheduled
commitments or expected tasks and set up a structure to help you follow
through. Experiment with what works for you until you hit on it. With every
appointment kept or chore completed, you’ll get a little hit of self-satisfaction,
and probably a lot of positive feedback from the people around you, too. That
kind of feedback reward also reinforces your desire to get more of it and will
help motivate your continued attention to that schedule and list.
If you’re the parent of a child with ADHD or VAST tendencies, you’ll
likely want to be the keeper of these schedules and the setter of routines on
your child’s behalf, as well as be the alert/alarm/reminder to keep them on
task. This isn’t the same as helicopter parenting—you don’t have to hover and
fix and solve everything for your child. Instead, think of your role as like the
bumpers on a pinball machine, the structure that keeps their energies and
wild ideas just a little more in check. Put simply: All children do better when
they know who is in charge. Knowing that they are not gives them a sense of
security and order. The same goes for adults, to a certain extent—having a
clear chain of command at work, for instance, is both orienting and especially
helpful to the employee with ADHD.

As much as we want to drive home the importance of creating regular and
clear expectations for your child’s time, it’s also critical that you build time
for unstructured and uninhibited play into your child’s daily schedule!
Running around, moving, imagining, making—this is the work of childhood,
and for the ADHD or VAST mind, this venting and creating time is all that
much more needed.
It’s hard to know when a child is old enough to take on the responsibility
of structure making—the age will be different for every child. When you do
cede control, do so incrementally so that you can be sure your child is ready
for each new responsibility.
A note of caution: We can’t deny that electronic devices can be helpful in
creating and maintaining structure for adults and kids alike. But beware the
rabbit hole of Internet and social media browsing! Being able to flit from one
topic to the next to the next with just the touch of a key or swipe of a screen
can give a jolt of stimulation (lights, colors, pictures, ideas!), which is, of
course, a balm to our boredom-averse brains.
Recognizing your tendency to get sucked into the Internet vortex is the
first step to controlling that impulse. But then do something about it: Adults
should try to limit their screen time by turning the device off or putting it
aside for several hours of every day (doing so as a family policy makes this
easier), and definitely keep screens away from where you sleep. Charge your

first step to controlling that impulse. But then do something about it: Adults
should try to limit their screen time by turning the device off or putting it
aside for several hours of every day (doing so as a family policy makes this
easier), and definitely keep screens away from where you sleep. Charge your
phone or tablet in another room overnight if your job doesn’t require you to
be “on call.”
A child with ADHD or VAST tendencies should be kept from regular
screen use for as long as the parents can resist their pleas for it. Because once
you’ve caved in and given your child a screen of her own, there is very little
room to turn back. As with when to give your child more responsibility for
her own daily schedule, when to give a child a screen is going to be different
for every family. But whenever that is, be sure to set clear boundaries around
screen use, including times when it will not be available or on. And definitely,
definitely confiscate the device at night (see Sleep, page 87).
And a note of encouragement: Rewards work much better for the ADHD
mind than do consequences. So whether you’re an adult working on structure
for yourself or a parent maintaining it for a child, build little rewards into the
systems you contrive. As mentioned earlier, getting praise from others is

always nice (parents and teachers, take note!), but why not also give yourself
or your child something of personal value when you complete a big task or
consistently remember a bunch of small ones?
To help guide you toward building a structure that is ADHD- or VAST-
friendly—at home, in your child’s classroom, or at work—keep the following
punch list of must-haves in mind:
S T E L L A R E N V I R O N M E N T S AT H O M E
You have the most control over your home environment. Strive for your home
to be a safe haven and happy place—for you and/or for your child. Key
elements include:
Playful attitude.
Permission for everyone to be real and genuine.
Enough structure, schedule, and rules to avoid confusion and chaos.
Meals together daily, with whoever lives in the home; food can bring us
together.
Worry together; no one should ever worry alone.
Encourage self-assertion and speaking up no matter what.
Never go to bed angry.
Have pets if you possibly can.
Laughter, lots of laughter.
But no ridicule or teasing, no matter how much fun they may be.
Honesty, honesty, honesty. No phony baloney.
But go easy on the brutal honesty. Keep it kind and gentle.
Make a point of expressing gratitude; in the soil of love and gratitude,
great and lasting joy takes root and grows.
Cheer for one another.
Add to this list what you and the troupe you live with, whoever they may
be, value most.

S T E L L A R L E A R N I N G E N V I R O N M E N T S
You may not have control over where your child goes to school—or precious
little choice, anyway—but you can still advocate for the following in your
child’s classroom:
Low-fear, high-trust atmosphere.
Shaming not allowed.
Rules of the room are clear. Even better: They are posted on the wall.
A seating arrangement that promotes connection with others.
The Socratic method of teaching. That is, dialogue and asking/answering
questions to get to information. A top-down, I lecture/you listen structure
is not compatible with the ADHD mind.
Project-based learning as much as possible.
Innovation and initiative encouraged.
Frequent breaks for exercise during class, e.g., standing up, dancing,

The Socratic method of teaching. That is, dialogue and asking/answering
questions to get to information. A top-down, I lecture/you listen structure
is not compatible with the ADHD mind.
Project-based learning as much as possible.
Innovation and initiative encouraged.
Frequent breaks for exercise during class, e.g., standing up, dancing,
jogging in place, stretching.
A teacher and an administration that encourage the identification of
strengths.
S T E L L A R W O R K I N G E N V I R O N M E N T S
Read this list with an eye toward where you work now. Does it make the
grade? If not, it is time to begin looking for a working environment that
meets your needs.
Low-fear, high-trust, from the top on down through the ranks.
Structured, organized, but not regimented.
Workspace configuration that encourages connecting with others.
Permission to be honest.
An organizational or a corporate policy against gossip and backbiting.
Clear lines of authority and communication.
Clearly stated policies on a range of important topics: vacations, time off,
harassment, personal email and texting.

Low use of the human resources department and high use of working
things out with colleagues directly and privately (except if there’s
harassment—then HR should have your back!).
Permission to be who you are, and the acknowledgment of both your
weaknesses and your strengths.
The capacity for everyone to take initiative, exert control over what they
do, and get credit for what they do.
Management makes an explicit effort to match workers’ talents with
tasks.
Management clearly states and explains expectations.
Nutrition
How you fuel your body really matters. Give it good-quality “gas” (food), and
your engine (body) will, barring disease or accident, run more smoothly. Of
course, there’s always conflicting advice about the best kind of diet. Whether
your concern is weight loss, heart health, anti-inflammation, or animal
welfare, there is a whole library’s worth of books written about all kinds of
diets and all kinds of “very best” combinations of nutrients.
But there should be no argument about what’s the best fuel for the ADHD
brain. We know a lot about what kinds of foods contribute to hyperactivity or
substandard performance of your “machinery.” And it’s really not that
complicated!
In general, it’s best to stick to whole foods. Whole grains are better than
processed grains; fresh foods are better than commercially preserved and
packaged ones. Avoid processed foods, junk foods, any foods that contain
additives, preservatives, and colorings.
The more veggies and fruits the better. Healthy oils and fats = good.
Trans fats = bad. Steer clear of fruit juices, because they’re mainly sugar (see
below) and empty calories. Your body also needs good protein like
unprocessed meats, fish, nuts, and eggs.
Drink lots of water. Or tea. We also love coffee, as caffeine is the best
over-the-counter focus medication that there is. Just drink it in moderation
and watch for side effects: elevated heart rate, irregular heartbeat, lots of trips

below) and empty calories. Your body also needs good protein like
unprocessed meats, fish, nuts, and eggs.
Drink lots of water. Or tea. We also love coffee, as caffeine is the best
over-the-counter focus medication that there is. Just drink it in moderation
and watch for side effects: elevated heart rate, irregular heartbeat, lots of trips

to the bathroom (it’s a laxative and a diuretic), insomnia, agitation, and
irritability. These are all signs you’ve drunk too much coffee!
And then this all-important piece of advice: Avoid sugar. Sugar promotes
the production and release of dopamine, and the ADHD brain loves a squirt
of dopamine. Unfortunately, as good as that initial influx of dopamine might
feel—you’re energized, cheery, satisfied—you have to keep ingesting sugar to
keep up that feeling. That’s the reason for the gallon of ice cream at midnight,
the jumbo Reese’s Pieces in the movie theater, sauces and gravies on
everything, cookies galore. Not only is this bad for your waistline, but the
post-sugar/post-dopamine crash of mood and satiety feels terrible.
Aside from its low nutritional value and its being a temptation for people
with ADHD, most of us who have a lot of experience agree that for some
kids, sugar triggers disruptive behavior, though for other kids it’s no problem.
You have to be your own investigator. If your child goes to a birthday party,
eats cake and ice cream and drinks Coke, and comes home like a ballistic
missile, well, next time cut out the sugar or don’t go to the party or…be
prepared for a ballistic missile.
Some people with ADHD or symptoms of VAST do better when they
eliminate dairy (lactose) or go on a gluten-free diet. The best way to find out
is to try. Obviously, if you are gluten or lactose intolerant, you may already
know it, but some people who are not strictly gluten or lactose intolerant,
children and adults alike, do much better once they get on one of those
restricted diets.
Some forty years ago, Dr. Benjamin Feingold championed an entire diet
that was supposed to cure ADHD. It was a complex elimination diet that
excluded sweeteners, additives, colorings, and many foods that contain
salicylates, like cherries, almonds, tea, and tomatoes. Once a child gets on the
diet and sees improvement, you start adding back the foods you eliminated,
one at a time, so that you end up knowing which foods you can tolerate and
which foods make your symptoms worse.
Like many people trying to introduce something new, Feingold took his
diet too far, became too doctrinaire, and fell out of favor. But, as with many
new programs, there was much merit to his plan. We’ve seen certain kids
benefit tremendously from the Feingold diet, probably because of an
underlying sensitivity or allergy to the foods that were eliminated.

V I TA M I N A N D M I N E R A L S U P P L E M E N T S
There are some supplements everyone can agree to recommend: a
multivitamin; vitamin D; magnesium; B complex; vitamin C (ascorbic acid, as
well as Connect!); calcium; zinc.
Beyond that, there are a host of ADHD brain potions marketed by some
reliable people and some shady ones. Because supplements are not regulated
by the FDA, it’s the Wild West out there. One authoritative book we
recommend that explores a host of natural treatments is Non-drug Treatments
for ADHD, by Richard Brown and Patricia Gerbarg. It is an outstanding book
written by two top doctors who have no ax to grind or product to peddle.

reliable people and some shady ones. Because supplements are not regulated
by the FDA, it’s the Wild West out there. One authoritative book we
recommend that explores a host of natural treatments is Non-drug Treatments
for ADHD, by Richard Brown and Patricia Gerbarg. It is an outstanding book
written by two top doctors who have no ax to grind or product to peddle.
There is one supplement that we recommend specifically and take
ourselves: OmegaBrite.
*1 
Developed more than twenty years ago by a
Harvard-educated doctor named Carol Locke, OmegaBrite is an omega-3
fatty acid supplement that we feel confident is pharmaceutical-grade and free
of contaminants like mercury.
The reason fatty acids are good for your brain, and hence for ADHD, is
that the myelin sheaths that wrap around your neurons like rubber coating
around electric wires are made of fat. Maintaining that fatty composition
requires essential fatty acids. “Essential” means your body can’t synthesize
them; you have to ingest them. Unless you eat a ton of salmon, mackerel,
anchovies, and sardines, you do not get enough essential fatty acids in your
diet.
CBD
CBD—short for cannabidiol—is an extract from the cannabis plant. Yes, the
same plant from which marijuana is made. It’s quite the fad—now
recommended for everything from bad breath to lumbago to prenuptial jitters
—but we urge you not to dismiss it. In many ways it is the Next Big Thing in
supplements.
When we were in medical school, one of the most exciting new
discoveries was that of the endogenous opiate receptor system—the revelation
that our brains had receptors for opiates built into them. Shortly thereafter
came the discovery of endorphins, short for endogenous morphine, that is, the

body’s ability to produce morphine (which is what the runner’s high is all
about).
Some fifty years later, we now understand that the body has an
endogenous cannabinoid system as well, which is a big deal, opening the door
to a host of possible treatments for anxiety, pain, seizures, addiction, and, yes,
ADHD.
For our purposes, the main application of cannabinoids so far appears to
be in treating the anxiety that so often accompanies both ADHD and VAST.
Perhaps by interacting with the gabaminergic system, CBD can relieve
anxiety. Don’t be put off by the big word. GABA is just a molecule, a
neurotransmitter that drugs like the benzodiazepines (Valium, Xanax,
Klonopin, and others) and alcohol promote. In the right doses it can be
calming.
OmegaBrite also manufactures a CBD product called OmegaBrite CBD,
which they began selling in March 2020. Early reports are that it is calming
without being sedating. Dr. Hallowell takes it every day and reports that it
reduces his reactivity, his tendency to get annoyed too quickly.
Sleep
Has it really come to the point where we have to urge people to sleep? It used
to be that people had to be urged to wake up; now we have to urge people to
go to bed. Especially us stimulation seekers who have ADHD or VAST. We
don’t like to leave the party, or to turn off our devices, and so we stay up way
too late. But your brain will not function at 100 percent—or even close to it
—if you do not get enough sleep.
How much sleep is enough? The amount of sleep it takes for you to wake
up without an alarm clock. That’s your physiological requirement for sleep.
Try to get that much and your brain will repay you; your body will as well.

too late. But your brain will not function at 100 percent—or even close to it
—if you do not get enough sleep.
How much sleep is enough? The amount of sleep it takes for you to wake
up without an alarm clock. That’s your physiological requirement for sleep.
Try to get that much and your brain will repay you; your body will as well.
Insufficient sleep is associated with increased risk of obesity, depression, high
blood pressure, depressed immune function (which can lead to cancer), and
anxiety disorders.
A specific sleep disorder called sleep apnea can actually cause a syndrome
that looks just like ADHD. Sleep apnea is in what’s called the “differential

diagnosis” of ADHD, the list of conditions that can mimic ADHD. Also on
that list are hyper- and hypothyroidism; depression; caffeinism (drinking too
much coffee or other caffeinated beverages); bipolar disorder; anxiety
disorders; pheochromocytoma (tumor of the adrenal gland that causes it to
secrete large amounts of adrenaline); substance use disorders; post-traumatic
stress disorder; and the carrying of too many secrets and too much shame
(not a formal diagnosis, but we see it a lot). All of these conditions can not
only mimic ADHD but also accompany it.
If a person has sleep apnea, getting it treated can basically cure what had
looked like ADHD. You get this diagnosis by going to a sleep lab, which can
be found in most hospitals. You suspect the diagnosis if you typically wake up
still tired, if you are overweight (although thin people can have sleep apnea
too), and if you are particularly prone to irritability.
While medications can help a person get to sleep, there is a relatively new
device that is FDA-approved for insomnia, as well as depression and anxiety.
We have also found it helpful in some patients—of all ages—with ADHD. It
is called the Fisher Wallace Stimulator. It causes no side effects of note, nor is
it in any way habit-forming. The device uses a mild form of alternating
current to stimulate key neurotransmitters, including serotonin, dopamine,
and beta-endorphin, and lower cortisol, the stress hormone. It is safe and easy
to use by patients of all ages and is available upon the recommendation of
anyone licensed for healthcare in the state in which they practice. Dr.
Hallowell has prescribed it to several dozen patients. While not all of them
have found benefit, most have, not only for the approved conditions but for
ADHD as well. And since anxiety and depression, as well as insomnia, are
common conditions that coexist with ADHD, the stimulator is an excellent
non-medication alternative to consider. Go to Fisherwallace.com for
testimonials as well as references.
*2
H O W T O P R A C T I C E S L E E P H Y G I E N E
Sleep labs can prove the efficacy of these recommendations; your own
experience no doubt backs them up. You’ll sleep longer and better if you:

non-medication alternative to consider. Go to Fisherwallace.com for
testimonials as well as references.
*2
H O W T O P R A C T I C E S L E E P H Y G I E N E
Sleep labs can prove the efficacy of these recommendations; your own
experience no doubt backs them up. You’ll sleep longer and better if you:

Turn off electronics at least one hour before you hit the hay to give your
brain the needed time to slow down and become less stimulated.
Charge electronic devices overnight outside your bedroom.
Make your bedroom as dark as possible. The absence of light is the key
signal to your circadian rhythm that it’s time to wind down.
Turn down the heat. Or open a window a bit to get some fresh, cool air,
or turn on a fan or an air conditioner.
Populate Your World with Positivity
So far we’ve been talking about things you can largely control—the structure
of your day, what goes into your mouth, when you put your head on a pillow.
But other people are part of your environment too, and you can only
minimally control their actions or outlooks. But you can choose who you’ll
allow into your world and, to a degree, who you will spend time with. So
choose wisely.
For a child, if you have the luxury of options, this means choosing a
school that believes in helping him or her work from strengths. See page 68
for our recommended brief strengths assessment and share your child’s
answers with the school. Make sure that strengths assessment is part of your
child’s “record” so that everyone who comes into contact with him or her has
that baseline understanding. Even if you don’t have a choice of schools—
whether because of finances or geography—sharing the list of your child’s
strengths is a gentle way to advocate for his or her needs and can initiate a
positive conversation with a school or teacher who has yet to appreciate
what’s going on.
There are other things to look for in a school, or to ask of a school you’re
stuck with. Our punch list can be found in the Daily Structure discussion on
page 78. One thing to reiterate: Impress upon the school administration and
staff your child’s need for stimulation—so they can provide opportunities to
get up and move around and can try to tailor some of their teaching to your
child’s expressed interests.
For an adult, your workplace might surround you with positive,
understanding, appreciative-of-your-talents types. If so, wonderful! But if the
list (again, in Daily Structure, page 78) of circumstances that make for a

stellar working environment doesn’t match your daily experience, you’d do
yourself a favor by keeping an eye out for a job that’s a better fit.
We realize that’s a tall order—especially in a down economy (as at this
writing). So what else can you do to be sure you populate your environment
with positivity? Choose your friends and partner with great care!
We don’t have statistics to back this up, but our anecdotal evidence is
overwhelming: People with ADHD and VAST often make the mistake of
falling for train wrecks. That’s because helping and saving people in distress
is highly stimulating. Our advice: Try to fall for a stable person who is also
stimulating. They really do exist.
More generally, steer clear of people who bring you down, who gossip,
who are predominantly cynical and negative. That’s not to say you have to
associate only with cheerful optimists. Some of our best friends are dyed-in-
the-wool curmudgeonly pessimists, but they exude warmth nonetheless. What

stimulating. They really do exist.
More generally, steer clear of people who bring you down, who gossip,
who are predominantly cynical and negative. That’s not to say you have to
associate only with cheerful optimists. Some of our best friends are dyed-in-
the-wool curmudgeonly pessimists, but they exude warmth nonetheless. What
you want to avoid is people who drain you of all your positive energy. Notice
how you feel when you leave a person. That’s a good indicator of whether it’s
worth spending more time with that person.
Accept and Find the Right Help
The idea of asking for and finding the right kind of help is a cousin to one of
our overarching rules: Never worry alone. When the demands upon you
exceed your ability to meet them, get help in the right places from the right
people.
Most people understand that asking for help is not a sign of weakness, at
least in most contexts. If you’re a new parent, for instance, there’s usually no
shame in asking for advice or help from your parents or friends, or from your
new baby’s pediatrician. There is certainly still stigma around seeking help for
postpartum depression, but even that is dissipating as more and more women
raise their hands to say they’ve experienced it and more and more doctors
screen for signs of it. So it should be for asking for help for ADHD or VAST.
As we say all the time to our patients: Don’t just tough it out. Work smart, not
just hard.

The social limitations of ADHD/VAST can be painful and disabling, so it
is important to take this step seriously.
S O C I A L C O A C H I N G
While doing your best to associate with stellar people makes a lot of sense,
you can’t completely control the people you must associate with. Whether you
are a child in school, thrown in with a random new group every year, or an
adult in the workplace, being asked to collaborate with some people you don’t
much like, knowing how to get along with anyone who comes your way leads
to a happier and more successful life.
This is where new research comes to the rescue. Not so long ago we did
not have reliable methods of teaching children (let alone adults) how to get
along with others, but now we do.
Starting with Pavlov and his famous dogs in Russia, then coming to
America with B. F. Skinner and his equally famous rats at Harvard, the
behaviorist movement liberated us from the notion that free will alone
determines human actions. According to the behaviorists, if a person is
intrusive, or silly, or rude, that does not mean they intend to be that way, nor,
more important, that they are destined to continue to be that way.
The research into behaviorism spawned an entire arm of treatment that is
still widely and successfully used today: applied behavioral analysis (ABA).
Often used to treat autism, ABA can also be used to change habits of any
kind, learn new habits, develop new routines, toilet-train toddlers, even
manage large organizations. The mission of ABA is to develop a set of skills
that will help an individual do better in life.
But another approach can be more effective in teaching us how to read a
social scene rather than just change habits and behaviors. This method helps
people understand their behavior rather than just change it and is therefore
aptly called social learning. Instead of just focusing on skills, the practitioner
tries to help a child understand what’s going on in a social situation and learn

social scene rather than just change habits and behaviors. This method helps
people understand their behavior rather than just change it and is therefore
aptly called social learning. Instead of just focusing on skills, the practitioner
tries to help a child understand what’s going on in a social situation and learn
accordingly.
If you have a child who just can’t figure out how to get along, who doesn’t
“get” being in a group in the way that some other child doesn’t “get” word
problems in math, then you need a specialist who can go beyond ABA

training skills, who can do more than tell the child what actions to ape, what
words to recite, what motions to go through. You need a coach who can help
your child think and feel through all the various steps that combine to create
the amazingly complex interaction called “getting along.” This comes
naturally to some children, just as skating backward does to some. But to
others it is utterly foreign, just as some children fall on their butts when they
try to skate backward. However, there is a knack to both that can be broken
down into learnable steps. You do not have to be born with the knack. You can
learn it inductively, rather than memorize it or have it conditioned into you.
This is the great discovery that separates social learning from behaviorist
training.
The two groups, the ABA people and the social learning folks, argue over
who is right, which is counterproductive. Each group has a great deal to offer.
If you want to quit smoking or overeating or to break some other habit, go to
an ABA specialist. But if you want to learn how to get along with others, seek
out a social learning specialist, sometimes also called a social learning coach.
One truly excellent coach, Caroline Maguire, wrote an excellent book that we
urge you to consult: Why Will No One Play with Me? The Play Better Plan to
Help Children of all Ages Make Friends and Thrive.
It’s worth noting that changing behavior through ABA is often more than
enough. But sometimes you want to go deeper, to help a child—or anyone
else—understand cognitively and emotionally where they are and who they
are in social situations, recognize their options, and decide for themselves
what they want to do. Once they learn how to decide for themselves what they
want to do, rather than put on reflexive behaviors they’ve been conditioned to
show, real growth ensues. ABA is surface; social learning is deep. ABA is
more or less robotic; social learning helps you understand social situations
and respond according to your own desires and values. ABA is more
mechanical; social learning is more supple and human. By coaching children
in how to understand social situations and how to develop different ways of
handling them, you can teach them not only how to do it but also enjoy doing
so that the interaction is not just a matter of going through the motions.
S N
*1 OmegaBrite has sponsored Dr. Hallowell’s podcast Distraction.

CHAPTER 7
Move to Focus, Move to Motivate:
The Power of Exercise
ave a big paper due or presentation to give? Need to study for an
important test? Here’s a pro tip: Take a run around the block, go up and down
the stairs in your house, just do something to get yourself moving. You’ll
definitely notice the difference in your ability to focus and settle into the
needed zone. Better yet, make it a regular habit and consider it a necessary
dose of medicine to keep you functioning as your best self.
For getting and staying on track, exercise is one of the most powerful
non-medical tools we have and an important first line of defense. Beyond
making your cardiologist happy, or looking better in a bathing suit, one of the
most fascinating and beneficial effects of exercise is that it prepares the brain
to expand, learn, and change better than any other human activity. It
improves mood and motivation, reduces anxiety, regulates emotions, and
maintains focus.
From depression to anxiety as well as for ADHD and VAST symptoms,
exercise is just what the doctor should order.

SEEING IS BELIEVING
In the very early 1980s, a patient we’ll call David came to see Dr. Ratey.
A professor at an elite New England university, David had been incredibly
productive and successful at work—he’d written many books and published
dozens of papers, and he was a frequent keynote speaker around the world.
He’d also been a runner all his life; the marathon was his preferred distance.
Some months prior to coming to Dr. Ratey, however, David had twisted his
knee and was forced to stop training and competing. His pace was now
slowed to a walk, which he did gingerly at that.
David had recently emerged from a brief depression related to his injury,
which was understandable, since he was forced to step away from his lifelong
habit and passion in order to heal, but he was more concerned with other
challenges he was now facing. David couldn’t focus on his work, and his
personal life was a mess. This formerly high-functioning, multitasking
professor was procrastinating at every turn, didn’t return phone calls, was
getting unduly angry with his longtime girlfriend for stupid reasons, wasn’t
seeing friends, and his work on his many projects was grinding to a halt. He
could not get started on, nor stay with, his writing and reading, was forgetting
appointments, and was uncharacteristically disorganized. It seemed that the
change in his routine and environment had revealed his underlying ADHD.
Running had been a lifelong coping mechanism.
Because David was eager to reverse his downward spiral—desperate,
really, to be more like his old self—and because he could not yet get back to
running as a salve, Dr. Ratey prescribed Ritalin. It had an immediate positive
effect. Within six months, David’s ability to start and finish work had returned
and he was much better able to modulate his emotions, which was helping
matters in the relationship department.
When David’s knee healed and he was finally able to get back into his
running routine, he and Dr. Ratey agreed that the time was right to taper off
the Ritalin, which he did without any disruption to his work drive. In the
coming years, David occasionally used a small dose of Ritalin to sharpen his
focus, but his return to running was his own kind of medication, a truly
effective treatment for his previously unrecognized ADHD.

running routine, he and Dr. Ratey agreed that the time was right to taper off
the Ritalin, which he did without any disruption to his work drive. In the
coming years, David occasionally used a small dose of Ritalin to sharpen his
focus, but his return to running was his own kind of medication, a truly
effective treatment for his previously unrecognized ADHD.

THE SCIENCE
So what exactly is going on when you lace up your sneakers and go for a jog,
or hit the gym, or turn up the music to dance?
The benefits of getting your heart rate up are many, and perhaps one of
the most important is the release of a protein called brain-derived neurotropic
factor, or BDNF. We think of this as Miracle-Gro for the brain, as it creates
a fertile environment to grow new neurons, connectors, and positive pathways.
Additionally, when we exercise, we are using more nerve cells than in any
other human activity. The more we move, the more those cells are clicking
away and firing. When they fire, they release more neurotransmitters to carry
information from one nerve cell to the next, creating a boost in dopamine and
norepinephrine, which play a major role in regulating our attention system.
In fact, the role of the stimulants and antidepressants we prescribe for
ADHD is to increase the concentration of dopamine and norepinephrine in
the brain, as they contribute to maintaining alertness and increasing and
sustaining focus and motivation. One of the ongoing findings in ADHD
research is that some of the gene differences associated with ADHD are
related to faulty dopamine and norepinephrine machinery, so a blast of
exercise is like taking a stimulant that corrects this deficit for the moment.
We see an aroused and attentive being.
When you exercise, the clunky connectomes in the default mode network
become smoother, allowing for easier and more complete transitions into the
task-positive network, where we access our frontal cortex. Remember, the
frontal cortex is the CEO of the brain. When you get yourself moving, this
area is “sparked,” turning your attention system on and allowing you to stay
focused and on task.
The best part? You don’t have to be a marathon runner like David to get
the benefits. In 2018, a paper out of Spain looked at a range of studies over
twelve years using exercise as an intervention to treat ADHD. The team
looked at more than seven hundred individuals from eight countries. After
doing just twenty to thirty minutes of moderately paced exercise, those
subjects experienced an increased reaction speed and precision of response,
helping them to “switch gears” to focus with greater strength and accuracy.

Additionally, 65 percent of the people significantly improved their planning
and organization skills; this, after just a single episode of exercising for
twenty to thirty minutes.
SUCCESS IN THE CLASSROOM
Some of the most creative and outside-the-box thinking about using exercise
to help those with ADHD is coming from our schools and educators.
Teachers will be the first to tell you that almost no child can sit still for hours
upon hours, nor can most adults for that matter. It becomes even more
apparent when you have an increasing number of pupils in the classroom who
are ADHD or struggling with learning problems.
In Saskatoon, Canada, eighth-grade teacher Allison Cameron faced an
even greater challenge. She worked at City Park Collegiate, a school known

upon hours, nor can most adults for that matter. It becomes even more
apparent when you have an increasing number of pupils in the classroom who
are ADHD or struggling with learning problems.
In Saskatoon, Canada, eighth-grade teacher Allison Cameron faced an
even greater challenge. She worked at City Park Collegiate, a school known
as a place of last resort. This is where kids who don’t fit in at other schools in
the district are sent to get back on track. Many live in poverty with little
support, were born with fetal alcohol syndrome or have gotten into drugs and
alcohol themselves, or have taken a wrong turn in a multitude of both
academic and personal ways. It was here she was tasked with heading up a
behavior management program with the toughest of even these tough
students. As Allison tells it, “They were red-flagged as the worst-behaved
students in the division. In order to be red-flagged for the program, students
had to have a rap sheet pages long for fighting, defiance, disrespect.”
But that wasn’t all this young, energetic teacher was dealing with. The
majority of her students were reading and writing at least four grade levels
below where they should have been, and close to 100 percent had been
diagnosed with ADHD and were on medication for it. Absenteeism was
rampant, and with the majority of her kids battling major attention problems,
getting them to sit still long enough to learn was nearly impossible.
Allison had seen with previous students the power of exercise to help with
both behavior and cognition. She decided to give it a shot with her new
charges. “On the first day of school, I suggested we go for a run to see if we
could work on some of their irrational and combative behaviors….They

refused to run, so I settled with taking them for a walk. A thirty-minute walk
turned into a two-hour stroll for some and a free pass for two others to go get
high. After that day, I realized I had no choice but to keep them inside the
school to get their heart rates up.”
Undeterred, Allison persuaded a gym owner she knew to assist in getting
some key pieces of equipment donated to her cause. Soon her classroom was
crowded: she had eight treadmills and six stationary bikes, and also fourteen
heart rate monitors. That’s when things started to change. “I could see the
potential of the students and I knew if I could just get their heart rates up for
more than ninety seconds, we would all be much happier.”
Allison says that using the equipment herself was an important first step
in getting reluctant students to buy into the program. Also, their choice was
between getting on a treadmill or bike and sitting in a chair and doing math,
so it was no wonder they strapped on their donated heart rate monitors. “I
explained that all I was requiring them to do was elevate their heart rates to
sixty-five to seventy-five percent of their maximum. It was a novel concept for
the students and they started to see it as fun.”
During her forty-five-minute classes, Allison got her students up and
running for twenty minutes and then got down to classwork, which was
actually a net gain of learning time, since she had been previously spending
the first thirty minutes of class dealing with discipline problems. Now the
kids were up and moving, regulating their emotions while turning on their
attention systems. When they got off the equipment, they could sit still,

actually a net gain of learning time, since she had been previously spending
the first thirty minutes of class dealing with discipline problems. Now the
kids were up and moving, regulating their emotions while turning on their
attention systems. When they got off the equipment, they could sit still,
absorb information, and actually learn something in addition to feeling better
about themselves. “They were quitting smoking, losing weight, many were
able to reduce or get off of their medication, and students were telling me
how much better they felt. They were coming to school every day so they
could go on a treadmill!”
Attendance increased, and in the second semester, suspensions dropped to
zero. To top it off, test scores skyrocketed. “On average, their reading levels,
sight words, and comprehension had grown four full grade levels in four
months!” says Allison with pride. “These students became the biggest
advocates for the program, bragging to their peers and family about their
successes.”

While it’s impossible for every classroom to have treadmills and bikes, the
news of this kind of success is spreading, and many schools and teachers
recognize the benefits of “brain breaks,” or allowing kids to get up from their
desks and do some jumping around. Also, many school administrators
recognize the importance of good old-fashioned recess and are protecting that
free time—on the grounds that it improves learning and behavior—from
those who would do away with it in the name of more class time.
TIME-IN—A NEW KIND OF TIME-OUT
Another innovation increasingly used in classrooms is a spin on a traditional
“time-out.” A “time-out” asks a student to sit in a study hall or quietly outside
the principal’s office (or, in your house, in their room), but a “time-in”
engages them in some sort of physical activity. A time-in can be as simple as
getting a child on a stationary bike to restore emotional regulation, but some
elementary schools send kids to hop on an Urban Rebounder or mini
trampoline until they have calmed down. Others have the child walk up and
down stairs, or simply send the child on an errand to deliver something to
another part of the building.
One Boston school connected to the juvenile justice system, where most
of the kids have ADHD, has really taken the message to heart. Inspired by
Dr. Ratey’s 2008 book Spark: The Revolutionary New Science of Exercise and
the Brain, they’ve established a “Ratey Room,” which has a Dance Dance
Revolution setup, an Urban Rebounder, and some additional exercise
equipment. When students act up, they are sent to the Ratey Room. As they
sweat, they are getting their emotions in check and their brains turned on,
putting themselves back on track and ready to learn. You might think that
kids would be purposely disruptive in order to get sent to this fun-sounding
space, but in reality these kids—like all kids—want to stay in the regular
classroom with their peers. Being sent to the Ratey Room isn’t something
they gun for, but it is something from which they greatly benefit.
This kind of innovation is happening on the other side of the globe as
well. Tatsuo Okada, a Ph.D. from UCLA, is at the forefront of using exercise
and play to help those in Japan with ADHD, autism, and other brain

classroom with their peers. Being sent to the Ratey Room isn’t something
they gun for, but it is something from which they greatly benefit.
This kind of innovation is happening on the other side of the globe as
well. Tatsuo Okada, a Ph.D. from UCLA, is at the forefront of using exercise
and play to help those in Japan with ADHD, autism, and other brain

differences. Because physical activity had helped him with his own ADHD,
and because he was familiar with and inspired by Dr. Ratey’s Spark, Okada
started an after-school “Spark Center” in Tokyo in 2013 to get kids moving.
Buoyed by grateful parents, and the Japanese government’s acknowledgment
of the positive results, Okada has now opened eighteen locations around
Japan and has still more plans to expand.
Visit one of these brightly lit centers and you’ll see kids running around,
laughing and squealing. At first glance, it seems like a complete free-for-all.
But look closer and you will see highly engaged adult trainers playfully
chasing after the kids, encouraging them to do different obstacle courses or to
complete a series of tasks for which they have no choice but to stay focused.
The kids are actively using their attention systems, which are being further
strengthened by getting their heart rates up. “The program becomes much
more effective when it stimulates the child’s interest and curiosity,” Okada
explains. “We make sure to get the child’s attention, grow that interest, and
move with purpose….It is interesting to observe that when a child is focused
on exercise and play, his or her sensory and emotional issues almost
disappear.”
Any of these get-up-and-move strategies can be replicated at home, of
course. Rather than punishing your child with a time-out in their room or
forcing them to sit quietly, send them up and down the stairs, around the
block, down to the basement to get on a mini trampoline, or turn up the
music and get them dancing. One game that Okada uses can be easily
replicated at home: Tape random numbers on the walls around a room, or
outside on trees. Call out numbers and require kids to see how quickly they
can tag them. This gets their heart rates up, which in turn lights up the task-
positive network (TPN), serving to strengthen the connections between the
default mode network (DMN) and TPN in the process.
A QUESTION OF BALANCE
As Dr. Hallowell’s experience with Samuel (see chapter 3) illustrates, balance
and coordination training can be transformative for kids with ADHD. His
prescription of having the preteen do a variety of challenges, like standing on

one foot with his eyes closed, balancing on a wobble board, and juggling, may
have seemed strange when you first read about it, but there is hard science
behind strengthening the balance and coordination of those with attention
issues. And it’s never too early to start. One recent study looked at two groups
of high-risk preschoolers (based on their high level of ADHD symptoms) and
gave one group learned balance training. Although it was a small sampling
(fifteen kids in all), there was a significant improvement in attention and self-
control in those who did targeted balance training compared to those who
didn’t.
One fitness practice that does an excellent job of incorporating balance
and coordination, along with focus and discipline, is martial arts. At a 1990
conference for the faculty of schools dealing with the toughest kids in the

control in those who did targeted balance training compared to those who
didn’t.
One fitness practice that does an excellent job of incorporating balance
and coordination, along with focus and discipline, is martial arts. At a 1990
conference for the faculty of schools dealing with the toughest kids in the
United States, Dr. Ratey met teachers and counselors from educational
facilities that today are often called wilderness programs, places where
children with conduct disorders and extreme oppositional behavior are sent to
“straighten out.” To his surprise (remember, this was 1990), he learned that
many of these programs highlighted tae kwon do or karate as a required daily
course. From a distance, it might seem very risky to give kids with severe
behavior problems lessons in movement that can seriously injure others.
However, the counselors explained that they had very strict protocols and
excellent masters who demanded that the kids execute their punches, kicks,
and knee strikes with precision before moving up to the next skill level. This
workout required the kids to focus, control their own bodies, and master their
emotions. Combined with the physicality of martial arts, the workouts
seemed to strengthen the kids’ neural networks as well. The result was a drop
in their disruptive and dangerous behaviors, an improvement in grades, and
an all-around increase in well-being. This early result matches what we now
see in other studies of adding martial arts training to ADHD treatment: real
and sustained improvement in both children and adults. Finding the right
instructor is important, of course, but fortunately, recognizing how much
martial arts can benefit those with ADHD has not been lost on those who
teach and own facilities. There are many who specialize in working with kids
who have attention challenges.

YOGA AND MEDITATION
As anyone who has ever even dabbled in a yoga practice knows, with every
tree pose and warrior pose, you are strengthening your balance, along with
your focus. Yoga demands noticing the body and breath and making small
and specific adjustments to properly align with postures. Depending on the
kind of yoga you’re doing, you can also get your heart rate up, which
increases the benefit to your focus and learning capability.
A recent study from Taiwan looked at the effects of yoga on forty-nine
ten-year-olds. Roughly half of these kids did yoga twice a week for eight
weeks, and the other half—the control group—did not. The groups were
given two specific attention tests both before and after the eight-week period.
One of the tests is called the Determination Test, which assesses a person’s
reaction speed, attention deficits, and reactive stress tolerance in the presence
of continuous but rapidly changing acoustic and optical stimuli. The other
test, the Visual Pursuit Test, measures perception and selective attention
through line-tracking challenges. In both tests, significant improvements in
accuracy rate and reaction time were observed only for the group of kids who
had done yoga.
While obviously less aerobically challenging than yoga, meditation has
shown powerful results, and it is particularly helpful when wrestling with the
pesky default mode network of our brains. Remember, this is the area where
we can slip into endless destructive rumination, or find our minds wandering
and pinging from thought to thought, which is often colorfully referred to in

shown powerful results, and it is particularly helpful when wrestling with the
pesky default mode network of our brains. Remember, this is the area where
we can slip into endless destructive rumination, or find our minds wandering
and pinging from thought to thought, which is often colorfully referred to in
the meditation community as “monkey mind.” A recent study from Yale
University found that mindfulness meditation tangibly decreases activity in
the DMN, dialing it down when it seems to have a destructive hold.
With regular practice, you can actually change the structure of your brain
through meditation. A 2011 Harvard study found that just eight weeks of
mindfulness-based stress reduction work increased the cortical thickness in
the hippocampus. This is a key area of the brain that oversees our learning,
memory, and emotional regulation, all important areas to strengthen for those
of us with the variable attention stimulus trait.

An important part of meditation is a focus on breath. Becoming aware of
your breathing, through breath counting and other techniques, requires
targeted attention, which will naturally strengthen those connections to your
task-positive network. As your mind starts to wander, the goal is to go back
to focusing on your breathing over and over until your mind begins to become
more still. There are many apps that can help you do this, including
Headspace, Calm, and Mindfulness.
We also recommend what’s known as the “Ha” breathing technique. It’s
simple but takes some focus and concentration. To begin, inhale through your
nose to a count of three or four. Next, exhale through your mouth to a count
of six or eight making a soft haaaa sound as you do so. The inhale/exhale
relationship is always at a 1:2 ratio. Using this kind of forced breath
technique as you settle into meditation can interrupt those unwanted
ruminations, immediately turning up alertness and attention.
MOTIVATION
Some people lay out their workout clothes every night as a way to motivate
themselves to exercise in the morning. Others promise themselves a reward—
a kind of carrot to keep them working toward their workout goal. But there is
another now proven way to motivate yourself to stick with your exercise:
Imagine or recall how good it feels after you’re finished.
A recent study led by Dr. Michelle Segar at the University of Michigan
showed that for adults, the best long-term (defined as more than one year)
motivator for exercising was stress reduction and a feeling of well-being. In
other words, it’s not an external goal like wanting to lose weight for your
upcoming reunion or buying the gizmo you’ve had your eye on that really
works. Instead, it’s asking yourself to remember how good exercise makes
you feel that keeps you moving.
One of our favorite stories at the intersection of exercise, focus, and
motivation comes from a girl we’ll call Lucy. Lucy was smart as a whip, but
her ADHD made math difficult for her. She’d get easily frustrated—fractions,
decimals, and multiplication just didn’t come as easily to her as her other

One of our favorite stories at the intersection of exercise, focus, and
motivation comes from a girl we’ll call Lucy. Lucy was smart as a whip, but
her ADHD made math difficult for her. She’d get easily frustrated—fractions,
decimals, and multiplication just didn’t come as easily to her as her other

subjects. She didn’t have the patience to sit down and tackle the problems and
couldn’t wrap her brain around them. This caused her to have frequent
tantrums when she began her math homework.
Dr. Ratey suggested Lucy try jumping rope vigorously for five minutes
before starting on her math. It clicked! Feeling less anxious, and with her
brain turned on, she no longer felt as daunted by the math problems. Years
later, buoyed by her success, Lucy kept at this practice in both college and
nursing school. When she felt overwhelmed or frustrated with organic
chemistry, physics, or an anatomy lab, she’d jump rope, which had become
her “conditioned motivator.” She knew that doing so would instantly reduce
her stress, make her feel better, and get her brain back on track.
GET MOVING
There is no one perfect formula for the right amount of exercise or the best
target heart rate to help with ADHD and VAST issues; there are too many
variables. That said, we recommend that you do some sort of physical activity
for at least twenty minutes every day. Make it fun and interesting, and
something you will want to do again. And over the course of the week, vary
what you do; different activities stimulate different parts of the brain. Of
course, for those of us with ADHD, novelty is important for other reasons,
since boredom is our archenemy. It’s good to do a mix-and-match from the
following list:
Aerobic activity, getting your heart rate up to 70 percent max for at least
twenty minutes.
Balance training, to strengthen your cerebellum as well as your core.
Yoga or using a BOSU ball are both good options.
Focused fitness, which keeps you on point while getting your heart rate
up. Zumba or other dance programs, racket or team sports, and martial
arts all fit the bill.
For overall health and fitness, strength training is also excellent, and it
will naturally be incorporated into some of these activities.

If you want extra credit, take some of your fitness choices outside in
nature whenever possible.
For any and all of these exercise categories, it’s always helpful to be
accountable to someone, or to have a regular routine that involves someone
else. Walking after dinner with your spouse, a friend, or your child who is
struggling with symptoms has the added bonus of bonding time. And of
course getting fit with a friend, or friends, adds an extra layer of fun.

T

CHAPTER 8
Medication: The Most Powerful Tool
Everyone Fears
he number one question we hear from patients—or their parents—is
“Do you believe in Ritalin?” We understand that people are really asking if
we are of the school of doctors who prescribe medication to treat ADHD, but
we are often tempted to be literal and reply: “Ritalin is not a religious
principle!” Nor, as many would have you believe, is it an agent of the devil,
aka Big Pharma.
*1 
Unfortunately, from Adderall to Zenzedi, the medications
prescribed for ADHD have entered the realm of hot-button issues, and in that
realm reason disappears. We try to bring reason back into the conversation.
A VALUABLE TOOL
Over the long haul, skill building; finding the right school or job; finding the
right teacher, mentor, or mate; and developing what we call a life rife with
positive connections to people, activities, and purpose matter the most, but in
the short term nothing gives you the bang for your buck that medication can.
Indeed, as long as medications are prescribed and taken properly, they afford

by far the most immediate (in some cases within an hour of taking them) and
effective benefit of any treatment there is; they are a hugely valuable tool in
our therapeutic toolbox.
Whether to prescribe a medication (on the doctor’s part) and whether to
take one (on the patient’s part) ought to be based on empirical studies, not on
faith or the Internet or a gut feeling. Sure, base the decision on what you hope
for, but also on clear evidence you can see. To that end, when one of us
prescribes a medication to help a patient with ADHD, we do so as an act of
science, a decision rooted in our reading of carefully conducted randomized
controlled trials and with confidence that the efficacy of the medication is not
in doubt. In 2018, a large study of studies, compiled by Dr. Samuele Cortese
from the University of Southampton in the UK, looked at 133 randomized
research papers on the effects of medication on ADHD. The results were
conclusive that medication for ADHD is effective, not 100 percent of the
time, of course (no medication works 100 percent of the time), but on
average from 70 to 80 percent of the time.
People who disparage the use of medication or slander those of us who
prescribe it have probably never heard the stories of abject human suffering in
people of all ages that we hear every day, either in person or from people
writing to us from around the world. Nor have they heard a mother or a newly
treated adult cry over the amazing benefits the medication has led to in just a
matter of days, ending years of needless suffering. To deplore the use of a
tool that can not only relieve suffering but actually turn it into success, health,
and joy, well, that’s just plain ignorant, as well as cruel to the people whom it
scares away from ever trying medication.
Surprisingly, many who warn against ADHD medications—or who are
afraid to start one—might be unknowingly self-medicating through a
stimulant like caffeine—in their daily coffee order, or in any of the energy
drinks on the market (Red Bull, 5-hour Energy, Monster Energy drinks, and
others). Many other softly packaged over-the-counter “drugs” (Adrafinil and
ginkgo biloba supplements are popular “study drugs”) are used by teens and
adults to boost mood, arousal, and cognition. Unlike doctor-prescribed
stimulants, these over-the-counter products are not controlled and can have

drinks on the market (Red Bull, 5-hour Energy, Monster Energy drinks, and
others). Many other softly packaged over-the-counter “drugs” (Adrafinil and
ginkgo biloba supplements are popular “study drugs”) are used by teens and
adults to boost mood, arousal, and cognition. Unlike doctor-prescribed
stimulants, these over-the-counter products are not controlled and can have
various side effects, and any positive effects are often unsustainable.

ASSESSING WHEN THE TIME IS RIGHT
Even with assurances that it is powerful and safe, whether to put a child on a
medication, or to go on one yourself, is a big, often agonizing decision that
impacts the entire family. Which leads to another common question: “Could
we try a non-pharmaceutical treatment first and then try medication if the
other doesn’t work?” In other words, when is the right time to try medication?
As you saw from our coverage of cerebellar stimulation techniques in
chapter 3, we certainly do recognize the distinct merit of non-pharmaceutical
treatment, even if the results will not be as immediately seen or felt. But from
a strictly pharmacological standpoint, this strategy is sort of like saying “Let’s
try a year of squinting before we try eyeglasses.”
That said, we also feel strongly that no one should take a medication, or
ask their child to, unless they want to take it. Indeed, any medication works
better if you want to take it. This is because of the placebo effect, a proven
phenomenon that draws upon your mind’s ability to enhance the efficacy of
any intervention, from medication to surgery to acupuncture to exercise to
contact lenses to the next meal you eat.
Before you dismiss the placebo effect—or dismiss how you should factor
it into your decision about whether to take a medication for ADHD—
consider how much better you do on a job you want, or even at a job
interview for a job you want; consider how much better care you take of
something—a dog, a car, a boat, a house—if you really wanted it; consider
how much more you like your meal if you have been looking forward to
trying the restaurant in which it is served, or how much more you like the
movie if you picked it out, or how much more you like the president if you
voted for him or her, or your boss if he or she hired you (or your employee if
you did the hiring!).
Not to belabor the obvious, but this is a point most people overlook. It’s
really a fundamental principle of a happy and successful life. We do better
when we are involved with activities and people we want to be involved with.
We do worse, far worse, when forced or coerced. Like doing the right thing
for the wrong reason, even the best medication will not work as well as it
could if you do not want to take it. So wait as long as it takes for you or your

child not only to get comfortable but to want to take medication before you
start it.
THINK IN TERMS OF RISK VS. BENEFIT
A man we’ll call Dan approached Dr. Ratey after a speech on ADHD he gave
in California. Dan explained that his nine-year-old grandson, Steven, had just
been diagnosed as having ADHD. Steven was having frequent outbursts at
home; he couldn’t seem to settle down at the dinner table or focus on his
homework at night. He was failing in school, had already been held back a
year, and was unpopular with kids in the classroom. Dan seemed confident in
the clinical diagnosis, but he was also concerned that Steven’s parents didn’t

home; he couldn’t seem to settle down at the dinner table or focus on his
homework at night. He was failing in school, had already been held back a
year, and was unpopular with kids in the classroom. Dan seemed confident in
the clinical diagnosis, but he was also concerned that Steven’s parents didn’t
seem to put limits on him. In addition, they were resisting Steven’s doctor’s
recommendation to start medication. They feared that it might damage Steven
in some way, in addition to further stigmatizing him, setting him apart as
having a disorder. What, Dan asked, should I tell them?
A few things stood out in this all-too-common story. First, as Dr. Ratey
explained to Dan, setting control and limits is essential by age nine. An adult
can more easily create coping and organization mechanisms, hire a coach, and
recognize the problems and talk to a therapist. A child with ADHD needs to
learn boundaries with the help of a parent. Dr. Ratey also explained that
given his symptoms and behaviors, it was that much more important for
Steven to get outside to play and exercise. He also explained that good habits
around sleep, eating, and screen time were going to be essential for Steven.
On the all-important question of medication, Dr. Ratey suggested that
Steven’s parents be encouraged to do a serious risk/benefit analysis. Whether
just in casual conversation or more formally by making a pro/con chart
together, they needed to consider how ADHD was affecting Steven’s life
scholastically, socially, and emotionally. Was Steven at risk of developing a
self-image as a failure? Had he already done so? Was his inability to put on
the brakes impacting his socialization and efforts to make friends? Did they
see other ways to reverse the downward academic trajectory Steven was on,
and quickly?

When making your own risk/benefit assessment, we encourage you to
answer three important questions:
1. In addition to consulting my healthcare provider, have I learned as much
as I can about this disorder from reputable sources?
2. Am I doing everything I can in terms of non-medical treatments (e.g.,
connecting, building structure into my day, getting exercise and quality
sleep, eating well, meditating, and other beneficial habits)?
3. How much is this disorder negatively impacting my life or the life of a
loved one?
CONSIDERING THE OPTIONS
If the answers to these questions convince you to go the route of medication
for yourself or your child, you need to understand the pharmaceutical options.
When we first entered the field, the choices were limited. Now they are many:
stimulants, stimulant-like drugs, and what we call outlier medications, which
include long-acting versions of the others. What follows in this chapter is
explanation and commentary on each of these categories.
When it comes to ADHD medication, the important thing to remember is
that there is no one-size-fits-all approach. The advice of Paul Wender—who
was a professor at the University of Utah Medical School and someone we
think of as the father of biological psychiatry—is apt here: “Some drugs work
in some people, at some dose, some of the time.”
The key is to be patient with your healthcare provider until you come up
with a formula that works. This might entail multiple tries with multiple
drugs, and as we do with our patients, combining different drugs at different
times. Keep close tabs on any side effects, duration and peak of efficacy, and

The key is to be patient with your healthcare provider until you come up
with a formula that works. This might entail multiple tries with multiple
drugs, and as we do with our patients, combining different drugs at different
times. Keep close tabs on any side effects, duration and peak of efficacy, and
any shifts in impact, both positive and negative. The more your doctor knows,
the easier it is to tailor an effective treatment plan.
STIMULANTS

Stimulants are the ADHD drug of choice. They have been shown to be the
most effective with the fewest side effects; the 70 to 80 percent efficacy rate
mentioned above is attributable mostly to the use and study of this category
of medications. As with many prescription medications, there is some
concern—some of it valid—about becoming addicted to stimulants and/or
abusing them, though the issue is rather rare. We will get into these concerns
briefly below.
Stimulants can be divided into two main categories: methylphenidate type,
commonly packaged as Concerta, Ritalin, Focalin, Metadate, Quillivant, and
OROS-MPH), and amphetamine type, which you might recognize as
Adderall, Dexedrine, Evekeo, Vyvanse, and Mydayis.
It may seem counterintuitive to use something classified as a stimulant for
a brain that already seems in hyperdrive, but that logic discounts the fact that
stimulants actually raise the levels of dopamine and norepinephrine—two
neurotransmitters that are off-kilter in the ADHD brain. You might say that
stimulants stimulate the brain’s brakes, thus giving you more control.
An increase in dopamine helps our nerve cells pass on information more
“cleanly” from one to another. It helps to reduce the noise, quiet the
chatterbox, and tune your brain to the right channel. If the signals aren’t clear,
it’s easy to fall into confusion and anxiety.
Dopamine also increases our motivation. A 2020 study by the Brown
University psychologist Andrew Westbrook and colleagues showed that kind
of result, which many people report while taking a methylphenidate
medication: an increase in the amount of available dopamine in a region deep
in the brain involved in motivation (the caudate nucleus) and thus, as a
practical matter measured in the study, a desire to tackle a difficult task.
Those who were not taking a methylphenidate opted for an easier task.
There are non-pharmaceutical ways to increase dopamine—some healthy,
like exercise and engaging your creativity and being connected to others or to
a higher goal, and some counterproductive, like bingeing on carbs; using
drugs like alcohol, cocaine, marijuana, and Xanax; or engaging in compulsive
activities like gambling, shopping, sex, or workaholism. Failing to master the
adaptive pursuit of dopamine leads to addictions of all kinds, but mastering it
leads to success and joy.

a higher goal, and some counterproductive, like bingeing on carbs; using
drugs like alcohol, cocaine, marijuana, and Xanax; or engaging in compulsive
activities like gambling, shopping, sex, or workaholism. Failing to master the
adaptive pursuit of dopamine leads to addictions of all kinds, but mastering it
leads to success and joy.

By increasing norepinephrine (NEP) we increase arousal, making us more
awake. This improves our ability to take in information from the
environment, meaning that our senses are more attuned. We are better able to
“read the room” and our audio and visual understanding is clearer.
Both dopamine and NEP stimulate our executive functioning, controlled
by the prefrontal cortex (known as the CEO of the brain). This is where
planning, sorting, sequencing what’s important, helping with memory, and
evaluating consequences are housed. The executive function helps us to put
the brakes on: stopping inappropriate responses, impulsive actions, and
getting lured into the next internal or external stimulation.
When it comes to the two types of stimulants, the difference is this:
methylphenidate type drugs (like Ritalin) raise dopamine levels a little higher
than NEP. In the amphetamine type drugs (like Adderall), it’s the reverse.
Amphetamine drugs have a greater effect on NEP than on dopamine, though
also only by a small amount.
Researchers have also found a small divide in the efficacy of these
classifications of drugs based on a person’s age. For kids and teens,
methylphenidates were found to be slightly more effective; when it comes to
adults, amphetamines got the best results by a hair. Just about all the drugs
tested were less well tolerated than placebos, but this is to be expected.
STIMULANT-LIKE DRUGS
As the name would imply, stimulant-like drugs act like stimulants in that they
raise the levels of dopamine and norepinephrine, but they act on those
systems in very different ways. Marketed as Wellbutrin, Strattera, and
Norpramin, these drugs were developed as antidepressants but soon found
their niche in the ADHD world. Longer-acting than stimulants, they can be
used morning or night. With no abuse potential, they are a good option for
those at risk for substance abuse. They are also an alternative to try for those
who have side effects with stimulants. When they work, as they do for a
certain segment of the ADHD population (which we cannot predict in
advance), they can work beautifully. The downside is that, clinically, they

have been shown not to be as effective as the stimulants for most people.
Also, these drugs are slower-acting and may take a number of weeks to reach
peak efficacy, in addition to having some common side effects like insomnia,
agitation, dry mouth, nausea, headache, constipation, and, in the case of
Norpramin, cardiac arrhythmias.
Another stimulant-like drug, modafinil (brand name Provigil), works by
stimulating both the histamine network and dopamine, which makes us awake
and attentive. Originally designed for narcolepsy, and popular with shift
workers like night nurses and pilots, it also has benefits for some with ADHD.
The pluses include working very smoothly for eight to twelve hours and
having minimal side effects. It’s not FDA-approved for ADHD use, so getting
insurance approval can be tough, and some who take modafinil do experience
anxiety and sleeplessness.
Originally released in 1966 as an antiviral agent, Amantadine is another

The pluses include working very smoothly for eight to twelve hours and
having minimal side effects. It’s not FDA-approved for ADHD use, so getting
insurance approval can be tough, and some who take modafinil do experience
anxiety and sleeplessness.
Originally released in 1966 as an antiviral agent, Amantadine is another
stimulant-like medication worth mentioning. It was also originally used to
help with Parkinson’s symptoms like tremors, stiffness, and attention
difficulties. Amantadine has an effect on the dopamine system; it acts weakly
like a dopamine surrogate. It also stimulates another neurotransmitter that
assists in increasing the actual concentration of dopamine. It has recently
been used to treat attention difficulties in Alzheimer’s, in head trauma, and in
ADHD with some positive effect. While not yet FDA-approved for ADHD, it
is being investigated with an eye toward full approval. The positives of
Amantadine include a smooth effect that can last for up to twenty-four hours,
with few side effects. It is not addictive and not a controlled substance, which
means it can be prescribed with refills.
OUTLIERS
There are a number of drugs that don’t fit neatly into the stimulant or
stimulant-like category. We call these the outliers. Included in the outlier list
are clonidine and its sister drug, guanfacine, which is sold and promoted in its
long-acting form as Intuniv. These are both old blood pressure medicines that
are extremely useful alone or in combination with stimulants. Their major

effect is to calm agitation, aggression, and emotional hypersensitivity, along
with assisting with focus and attention.
One of the reasons these outlier drugs are gaining in importance is
because of a newly understood disorder called rejection-sensitive dysphoria, or
RSD. This is extreme emotional pain triggered by the perception, real or
imagined, that a person has been rejected, ridiculed, or criticized by
important people in their life. RSD may also be triggered by a sense of falling
short, such as failing to meet their own high standards or the expectations of
others.
Rejection sensitivity is often a part of ADHD. As discussed in chapter 1,
those with ADHD have a tendency to dwell on the “slights” of normal life and
amplify their effect. Often, a person with RSD and ADHD is hypervigilant,
trying at all costs to diminish these feelings. This can lead to misreading the
cues of others, or withdrawing from their lives to avoid the anticipated slights.
RSD can also lead to aggressive outbursts and temper tantrums as a person
attempts to fight back against imagined threats.
William Dodson, a wonderful psychiatrist who is leading the way in
helping us understand the prevalence of this disorder, says that just knowing
there is a name for this feeling comforts patients. Whether it is isolated RSD
or RSD that coexists with ADHD, it makes a difference to people to realize
they are not alone. By naming it, they can actively attempt to tame it, staving
off the downward spiral to despair. For those who are deeply affected by
RSD, about one in three people feel relief from this despair with a
combination of clonidine and guanfacine. While there is no risk of abuse with
these medications, they can cause a patient’s blood pressure to drop
significantly. And stopping the regime should be done slowly, as otherwise it
can cause a significant rise in blood pressure and pulse.

RSD, about one in three people feel relief from this despair with a
combination of clonidine and guanfacine. While there is no risk of abuse with
these medications, they can cause a patient’s blood pressure to drop
significantly. And stopping the regime should be done slowly, as otherwise it
can cause a significant rise in blood pressure and pulse.
It’s been more than four decades since we entered the field, and while
there haven’t been many seismic shifts in ADHD medication in the ensuing
years, one game changer has been the concept of “long-acting” stimulants.
Our ADHD drugs used to work an average of four hours. Now long-acting
versions can help patients remain relatively symptom-free for up to twelve
hours. One 2006 study showed that while 40 to 50 percent of those on short-
acting medication were satisfied with their treatment, the numbers bump up
to 70 percent for those taking the long-acting drugs. As a bonus, those of us

with ADHD have a tough time remembering to take pills multiple times a
day, so it’s easy to see why long-acting stimulants have quickly become the
standard of care.
One uniquely different, relatively new long-acting drug on the market is
Vyvanse. Approved in 2008, it is a stimulant that cannot be abused (i.e.,
snorted or injected). Its delivery system is different in that it is activated by an
enzyme in the red blood cells in the gut. Because of this unique delivery
system, it also lasts longer. While it advertises twelve to sixteen hours of
efficacy, it averages being effective in a concentrated way for about ten hours.
It’s become one of the most popular drugs on the market because of its long-
acting properties and because it is completely soluble, so it’s easy to
administer in beverage form to kids who don’t like to take pills. It can be
taken with or without food, giving parents options.
An even newer drug touting a long-acting and novel delivery system has
the catchy name of Mydayis. Launched in 2017, this pill boasts a sixteen-
hour cycle activated within your body in three steps—morning, noon, and
evening.
Long-acting drugs are extremely popular, but when first trying medication
it is advisable to use the short-acting stimulants until it can be determined that
the drug can be well tolerated.
ADDICTION AND ABUSE
Spoiler alert! Taking a stimulant or stimulant-like drug early in life helps
prevent, not promote, addiction later on. Since 80 percent of addictions get
started between the ages of thirteen and twenty-three, and since people with
ADHD are far more prone to develop an addiction than the general
population, and since taking stimulant medication reduces the risk of
addiction later on, it makes a lot of sense to start a child on stimulant
medication before age thirteen.
Addiction and abuse are understandably some of the main concerns cited
by those reluctant to take an ADHD drug, and the concerns are valid. In fact,
ADHD drugs are listed among the top drugs abused by high school and

addiction later on, it makes a lot of sense to start a child on stimulant
medication before age thirteen.
Addiction and abuse are understandably some of the main concerns cited
by those reluctant to take an ADHD drug, and the concerns are valid. In fact,
ADHD drugs are listed among the top drugs abused by high school and

college students. It’s important to note, though, that ADHD stimulant drugs
are mainly used inappropriately by those not even diagnosed with ADHD.
These “neurotypical” abusers use them to stay up to study, or mix them with
other drugs of abuse, like alcohol and marijuana, to intensify the high, among
other reasons only teenagers can come up with.
It is less common for those who have ADHD to purposely take far too
much of a stimulant medication. Long-term studies found that those with
ADHD who are successfully treated with stimulants become addicted to
substances far less than the general population, and certainly less than the
population who have ADHD and do not take stimulant medication.
On the flip side, teens who have ADHD and are not treated are five to ten
times more likely to become addicted to substances. It is a myth that people
come to psychiatrists to get the highest dose and greatest number of pills.
Indeed, one of the biggest problems we encounter is that patients do not take
the total prescribed dosage for the month. The tough part is keeping them on
the medicine, not making sure they aren’t angling for an overabundance of
extra-strength medication. That being said, when people do go off stimulant
medication, they can experience slight symptoms of withdrawal. This happens
every evening, and the symptoms can be so mild as to be missed, or can lead
to increasing tiredness, anxiety, aggression, or a variety of other
presentations. Which leads us to a discussion of common side effects.
SIDE EFFECTS
Some of the most frequent side effects associated with ADHD medications
are irritability, dry mouth, disruption of sleep, headaches, and a decrease in
appetite. There can be an increase in heart rate and blood pressure over time
(which are minimal), so some worry about how it will impact the heart in the
long term. Recent studies have shown the effects are slim to none, but there
are always warnings when taking medication. This is why it is extremely
important to be closely monitored by your doctor when on a prescription,
especially in the beginning stages.

Last but not least, there is a happy byproduct of treating ADHD with
prescription medication: Proper diagnosis and treatment can not only help
your ADHD but also be protective against secondary problems like anxiety
and/or depression.
GENETIC TESTING TO AID IN SELECTING MEDICATION
The treatment of cancer gained spectacular results from studying patients’
genes, from discovering biomarkers for various forms of cancer, and from
planning treatment based upon a patient’s genetic profile. Naturally,
researchers started to look at genetic testing for diseases of the mind and the
field of psychiatry. Indeed, for some time now, clinicians like us have been
able to submit a sample of a patient’s DNA—derived from saliva, blood, skin,
or even hair—to a company that will assay the sample and provide a genetic
analysis.
Patients and clinicians alike hoped that such an analysis could tell us what
drug or medication to use. But in talking to the best experts we know, the
verdict has consistently been “It’s promising, but we’re not there yet.” So we

or even hair—to a company that will assay the sample and provide a genetic
analysis.
Patients and clinicians alike hoped that such an analysis could tell us what
drug or medication to use. But in talking to the best experts we know, the
verdict has consistently been “It’s promising, but we’re not there yet.” So we
do not routinely get genetic testing on our patients to guide our choice of
medication unless the patient insists upon it. It certainly does no harm, other
than that it can cost anywhere up to $2,000, depending on the test, the
company, and the extent of one’s health insurance coverage.
These tests will not tell you or your doctor exactly which drug will work
best. This is the “there” we’re not yet at, as much as we all would like to be.
But these genetic tests can provide extremely valuable information on how
rapidly you will metabolize a certain medication, which can help
tremendously in dosing and in some cases prevent a disaster—if you lack a
certain enzyme, for example.
We found one company we really like, called Tempus,
*2 
based in
Chicago. The man who founded it in 2015 did so because he was appalled at
the lack of genetic data that doctors could draw upon to develop a treatment
plan for his wife’s cancer. So he set about building his own company to
change that situation.

But then, in 2018, Tempus started looking into psychiatry as well as
cancer testing. Most companies offer what’s called “small panel sequencing,”
reporting on twelve to fifteen genes and correlating them with medications
that might be prescribed.
Tempus stands out from the crowd because it uses what’s called “whole
exome sequencing.” A strand of DNA contains exons, which are the coding
sites—the sites that dictate the action—as well as introns, whose function is
debated. Right now the intron seems to be a spectator to the action, but
nature rarely creates spectators, so some essential function will likely be
found. But we know for sure the exons matter a lot. Taken together, the exons
form an exome.
Whole exome testing is important because in compiling it (coupled with
the patient’s personal history and family history, which Tempus also collects)
biomarkers can appear in what at first seems like a vast field of irrelevant
data. So Tempus wants to collect and test for the whole shebang.
By doing whole exome sequencing rather than the more common small
panel sequencing, Tempus is not only laying a foundation for new discoveries,
but also giving the patient and the doctor more information to work with.
You’d think that since you’re getting more information, the cost would
reflect that. Not so. Tempus seeks reimbursement from insurance companies
for their test and has a robust financial assistance program to avoid undue
financial burden on the patient. The majority of applicants qualify for a
maximum out-of-pocket cost of no more than $100 for the test. So when the
maximum you might pay is $100, with zero dollars being a distinct
possibility, the risk of financial harm previously associated with testing is
eliminated for many patients.
It seems to us that the time has come to at least consider using genetic
testing routinely in prescribing medications.
THE MEDICAL ARSENAL AT A GLANCE
For a more complete rundown of stimulants and non-stimulants and outliers
used to treat ADHD, we’ve included this helpful chart, originally printed in,

It seems to us that the time has come to at least consider using genetic
testing routinely in prescribing medications.
THE MEDICAL ARSENAL AT A GLANCE
For a more complete rundown of stimulants and non-stimulants and outliers
used to treat ADHD, we’ve included this helpful chart, originally printed in,

and reprinted with the permission of, ADDitude magazine, a helpful resource
for both clinicians and patients.
S N
*1 Neither of us receives any funding from drug companies.
*2 Neither Dr. Hallowell nor Dr. Ratey receives any compensation from Tempus. Not even
lunch!

ADHD Medication
MEDICATION FORMULA-
TION
COMPOUND DURA-
TION
DOSING CONSIDERA-
TIONS
SAVINGS PROGRAM
METHYLPHENIDATE
Adhansia XR®
(Adlon
Therapeutics)
Extended-
release
capsule 25
mg, 35 mg,
45 mg. 55
mg, 70 mg,
85 mg
Capsule with
multilayer beads;
20% immediate-
release layer and
80% controlled-
release layer
12
hours or
more
Capsule may be opened
and contents swallowed
completely with
applesauce
N/A
Aptensio XR®
(Rhodes
Pharmaceuticals)
Extended-
release
capsule 10
mg, 15 mg,
20 mg, 30
mg, 40 mg,
50 mg, 60
mg
Capsule with
multilayer beads;
40% of dose in the
immediate-release
layer and 60% in the
extended-release
layer (2nd peak at
7–8 hrs)
12
hours
Capsule may be opened
and contents swallowed
completely with
applesauce
YES
Concerta® or
generic
*1
(Janssen and
others)
Extended-
release tablet
18 mg, 27
mg, 36 mg,
54 mg
Tablet with OROS
osmotic pump
technology; biphasic
release with initial
peak at 1 hr (22% of
dose) and 78%
gradual release over
9 hrs. Only Patriot
version is authorized
for substitution for
brand at pharmacy.
12
hours
Must be swallowed
whole; non-absorbable
shell may be passed in
stool
YES
Cotempla
XRODT™ (NEOS
Therapeutics)
Extended-
release orally
disintegrating
tablet 8.6
mg, 17.3 mg,
25.9 mg
Dissolving tablet
with 25%
immediate-release
microparticles and
75% extended-
release
12–13
hours
Grape-flavored; allow to
dissolve in saliva
YES
Daytrana®
(Noven
Therapeutics)
Transdermal
patch 10 mg,
15 mg, 20
mg, 30 mg
Drug dispersed in
adhesive layer;
applied daily
9 hour
wear-
time
The time worn can be
varied to control the
duration of effects;
monitor for skin rash or
sensitivity. Discard
patches appropriately.
Slow onset of medication
over initial six hours.
YES
JORNAY PM™
(Ironshore
Pharmaceuticals)
Delayed
release—
Extended
release
capsule
20mg, 40mg,
60mg, 80mg,
100mg
Dual-layer delexis
delivery: outer layer
delays release for up
to 10 hours; inner
layer controls
daytime release
12–14
hours
Taken before going to
sleep to provide early
morning symptom
control
YES
Metadate CD®
(UCB, Inc.)
Extended-
release
capsule 10
mg, 20 mg,
30 mg, 40
Diffucaps capsule
with 30%
immediate-release
beads and 70%
8–10
hours
Capsule may be opened
and contents swallowed
completely with
applesauce

12–14
hours
Taken before going to
sleep to provide early
morning symptom
control
YES
Metadate CD®
(UCB, Inc.)
Extended-
release
capsule 10
mg, 20 mg,
30 mg, 40
Diffucaps capsule
with 30%
immediate-release
beads and 70%
8–10
hours
Capsule may be opened
and contents swallowed
completely with
applesauce

mg, 50 mg,
60 mg
delayed-release
beads
*2
Methylphenidate
HCI (Lupin)
Chewable
tablet 2.5
mg, 5 mg, 10
mg
Methylphenidate
HCl
3–4
hours
Grape-flavored chewable
tablet
Methylphenidate
HCI
(Mallinckrodt
Pharmaceuticals)
Extended-
release
tablet
*3 
10
mg, 20 mg
Methylphenidate
HCl
6–8
hours
Swallow whole; do not
crush or chew
Methylin™ Liquid
or generic
(Shionogi
Pharma and
others)
Oral solution
5 mg/5 mL,
10 mg/5 mL
Methylphenidate
HCl
3–4
hours
Colorless, grape-flavored
liquid; store at room
temperature
Quillichew ER™
(Tris
Pharmaceuticals)
Extended-
release
chewable
tablet 20 mg,
30 mg, 40
mg
30% of the dose is
immediate-release
and 70% extended-
release
8 hours Cherry-flavored; may be
taken with or without
food
YES
Quillivant XR®
(Tris
Pharmaceuticals)
Extended-
release oral
suspension
25 mg/5 mL
20% of the dose is
immediate-release
and 80% extended-
release
12
hours
Fruit-flavored; may be
taken with or without
food. Shake bottle for at
least 10 seconds. May be
stored at room
temperature.
YES
Ritalin® or
generic (Novartis
and others)
Short-acting,
immediate-
release tablet
5 mg, 10 mg,
20 mg
Methylphenidate
HCl
3–4
hours
Abrupt onset and offset
increase the number and
severity of side effects
Ritalin LA®
(Novartis)
Extended-
release
capsule 10
mg, 20 mg,
30 mg, 40
mg, 60 mg
Capsule with
Spheroidal Oral Drug
Absorption System
(SODAS)
technology; 50%
immediate-release
beads and 50%
delayed-release
(2nd peak 4 hrs
later)
*4
8–12
hours
Capsule may be opened
and contents swallowed
completely with
applesauce
Ritalin SR®
(Novartis)
Sustained-
release tablet
20 mg
Methylphenidate
HCl
8 hours Tablets should be
swallowed whole, never
crushed or chewed
DEXMETHYLPHENIDATE
Focalin® or
generic (Novartis
and others)
Short-acting,
immediate-
release
tablet
*5 
2.5
mg, 5 mg, 10
mg
Dexmethylphenidate
Hydrochloride
4–6
hours
Isolated active
dextroisomer; give
approximately one-half
methylphenidate dose
Focalin XR® or
generic (Novartis
and others)
Extended-
release
capsule 5
mg, 10 mg,
15 mg, 20
Capsule with SODAS
technology; 50% of
the beads contained
in the capsule are
immediate-release
8–12
hours
Capsule may be opened
and beads swallowed
completely with
applesauce
YES

mg, 25 mg,
30 mg, 35
mg, 40 mg
and 50% are
delayed-release
*6
AMPHETAMINE
Adzenys ER™
(Neos
Therapeutics)
Extended-
release oral
suspension
1.25 mg/mL
50% immediate-
release and 50%
delayed-release
particles
10–12
hours
Orange-flavored; may be
taken with or without
food. Shake bottle
vigorously before
dispensing the dose.
YES
Adzenys XR-
ODT™ (Neos
Therapeutics)
Extended-
release orally
disintegrating
tablet 3.1
mg, 6.3 mg,
9.4 mg, 12.5
mg, 15.7 mg,
18.8 mg
Dissolving tablet
with 50%
immediate-release
and 50% delayed-
release particles
10–12
hours
Allow tablet to dissolve in
saliva
YES
Dyanavel® XR
(Tris Pharma)
Extended-
release oral
suspension
2.5 mg/mL
Oral solution with
bubble gum flavor
13
hours
Bubble gum flavor; may
be taken with or without
food. Shake bottle before
preparing the dose. May
be stored at room
temperature.
YES
DEXTROAMPHETAMINE
Dexedrine® or
generic (Amedra
Pharmaceuticals

(Tris Pharma)
Extended-
release oral
suspension
2.5 mg/mL
Oral solution with
bubble gum flavor
13
hours
Bubble gum flavor; may
be taken with or without
food. Shake bottle before
preparing the dose. May
be stored at room
temperature.
YES
DEXTROAMPHETAMINE
Dexedrine® or
generic (Amedra
Pharmaceuticals
and others)
Short-acting
tablet 5mg,
10 mg
Dextroamphetamine
Sulfate
3–4
hours
Take first dose on
awakening
Dexedrine ER® or
generic (Amedra
Pharmaceuticals
and others)
Extended-
release
spansule 5
mg, 10mg,
15 mg
Dextroamphetamine
Sulfate delivered in
a sustained-release
spansule. Initial
dose released
immediately,
remaining
medication released
gradually.
5–10
hours
ProCentra® or
generic
(Independence
Pharma, Tris
Pharma, and
others)
Oral solution
5mg/5mL
Dextroamphetamine
Sulfate
3–6
hours
Bubble gum flavor; may
be taken with or without
food. Shake bottle before
preparing the dose. May
be stored at room
temperature.
YES
Zenzedi® (Arbor
Pharmaceuticals)
Immediate-
release tablet
2.5 mg, 5
mg, 7.5 mg,
10 mg, 15
mg, 20 mg,
30 mg
Dextroamphetamine
Sulfate
4–6
hours
Take first dose on
awakening
YES
METHAMPHETAMINE
Desoxyn® or
generic
(Recordati Rare
Diseases and
others)
Immediate-
release tablet
5 mg
Methamphetamine 4–6
hours

MIXED AMPHETAMINE SALTS
Adderall® or
generic
(CorePharma
and others)
Short-acting,
immediate-
release tablet
5 mg, 7.5
mg, 10 mg,
12.5 mg, 15
mg, 20 mg,
30 mg
Dextroamphetamine
Saccharate,
Amphetamine
Aspartate,
Dextroamphetamine
Sulfate, and
Amphetamine
Sulfate
4–6
hours
May be taken with or
without food
Adderall® XR or
generic (Takeda
and others)
Extended-
release
capsule 5
mg, 10 mg,
15 mg, 20
mg, 25 mg,
30 mg
Capsule with
Microtrol delivery
system: 50%
immediate-release
and 50% delayed-
release beads
*7
10–12
hours
Capsule may be opened
and beads swallowed
whole with applesauce
Mydayis®
(Takeda)
Long-acting
capsule 12.5
mg, 25 mg,
37.5 mg, 50
mg
Long-acting, triple-
bead, mixed-
amphetamine salts
formulation
14–16
hours
Capsule may be opened
and beads swallowed
whole with applesauce
YES
AMPHETAMINE SULFATE
Evekeo® (Arbor
Pharmaceuticals)
Immediate-
release tablet
5 mg, 10 mg
50%
dextroamphetamine
and 50%
levoamphetamine
4–6
hours
YES
LISDEXAMFETAMINE
Vyvanse®
(Takeda)
Long-acting
capsule 10
mg, 20 mg,
30 mg, 40
mg, 50 mg,
60 mg, 70
mg
Lisdexamfetamine
Dimesylate; peaks in
3.5 hrs
*8
10–13
hours
Capsule may be opened
and contents dissolved in
water, yogurt, or orange
juice; use immediately
after dissolving
YES
Vyvanse®
(Takeda)
Chewable
tablet 10 mg,
20 mg,
30mg, 40
mg, 50 mg,
60 mg
Lisdexamfetamine
Dimesylate; peaks in
3.5 hrs
*9
10–13
hours
Strawberry flavored; may
be taken with or without
food
ATOMOXETINE
Strattera® or
generic (Lilly and
others)
Long-acting
capsule 10
mg, 18 mg,
25 mg, 40
mg, 60 mg,
80 mg, 100
mg
All-day atomoxetine 24
hours
Selective norepinephrine
inhibitor. Starts working
in a few days to one
week, but may take
several weeks to achieve
full effect. Swallow
capsule whole; powder is
irritating. Dose is
commonly divided in two
to lower side effects.
YES
CLONIDINE
Kapvay® or
generic clonidine
ER (Advanz
Extended-
release tablet
Clonidine
Hydrochloride
24
hours
Swallow tablet whole

in a few days to one
week, but may take
several weeks to achieve
full effect. Swallow
capsule whole; powder is
irritating. Dose is
commonly divided in two
to lower side effects.
YES
CLONIDINE
Kapvay® or
generic clonidine
ER (Advanz
Extended-
release tablet
Clonidine
Hydrochloride
24
hours
Swallow tablet whole

Pharmaceuticals
and others)
0.1 mg, 0.2
mg
GUANFACINE
Intuniv™ or
generic (Takeda
and others)
Extended-
release tablet
1 mg, 2 mg, 3
mg, 4 mg
Guanfacine 24
hours
Swallow tablet whole; a
high-fat meal may
increase absorption and
lead to toxicity. FDA-
approved for doses up to
7 mg.
YES
BUPROPION
Wellbutrin XL®
(Valeant
Pharmaceuticals)
Extended-
release tablet
150 mg,
300 mg
Bupropion HCL 24
hours
Low efficacy; takes eight
weeks to fully develop
benefits. IR dosed three
times a day; SR dosed
two times a day; XL
dosed once a day.
YES
S N
*1 Note that most of the formulations that are marketed as “generic Concerta” are not reliable and have been downgraded
from AB status to BX (“cannot be substituted for the brand name by the pharmacy”). As of September 2019, patients should
accept only the Patriot generic, which is “authorized” by the brand name maker.
*2 Administration with a high-fat meal may affect the rate of absorption of some medications, but it has no significant effect
on the total amount of the medication that is absorbed.
*3 Administration with a high-fat meal may affect the rate of absorption of some medications, but it has no significant effect
on the total amount of the medication that is absorbed.
*4 Administration with a high-fat meal may affect the rate of absorption of some medications, but it has no significant effect
on the total amount of the medication that is absorbed.
*5 Administration with a high-fat meal may affect the rate of absorption of some medications, but it has no significant effect
on the total amount of the medication that is absorbed.
*6 Administration with a high-fat meal may affect the rate of absorption of some medications, but it has no significant effect
on the total amount of the medication that is absorbed.
*7 Administration with a high-fat meal may affect the rate of absorption of some medications, but it has no significant effect
on the total amount of the medication that is absorbed.
*8 Administration with a high-fat meal may affect the rate of absorption of some medications, but it has no significant effect
on the total amount of the medication that is absorbed.
*9 Administration with a high-fat meal may affect the rate of absorption of some medications, but it has no significant effect
on the total amount of the medication that is absorbed.

I

CHAPTER 9
Putting It All Together:
Find Your Feel and Make It Real
f you have ADHD, variable attention stimulus trait (VAST), a race car
brain with bicycle brakes, or whatever term you’ve settled on for this blessed
and cursed kind of brain, it’s likely you’ve reached this page without having
read the entire book. That’s okay, we certainly understand; we know that
people like us tend to skip to the end to find the punch line, that we like to
put the cart before the proverbial horse.
Let us fill you in briefly: What the cart contained was a lot of stories,
explanations, suggestions, and science on how to turn the kind of brain we
have into an extraordinary asset while preventing it from becoming the
terrible curse it can sometimes be. ADHD and VAST have brought such
shame and pain to so many who don’t deserve it that we’re passionate about
using what we know and doing all that we can to end that shame and pain.
ADHD was totally misunderstood for so very, very long. Tragically,
terribly misunderstood. This led to the sadistic and systematic betrayal of
innocent children, punishing them for what they could not control, and the
wholesale wasting of the talent of generations of adults. For far too long, it
was considered okay to call those of us with ADHD imbeciles, morons, and

idiots. Based on IQ, those were actual diagnostic terms in medical textbooks
well into the 1960s. Who wouldn’t want to skip to the end of that?
But why did you pick up the book at all? What were you looking for?
Were you hoping for a happy ending?
If so, you’ve come to the right place! We can give you that happy ending.
Not an ending, actually, but a point of demarcation, because finally we’re
getting it right in some places, most of the time. Finally, the world is catching
on that our issue isn’t laziness or disrespect or self-indulgence. No, our neural
functioning is slightly but meaningfully different from that of the
“neurotypicals” in the population. There is a sometimes glitchy connection
between our task-positive network and the default mode network in our
brains. And our cerebellum—another area of the brain—is often a little off
balance and in need of strengthening. In other words, the science is proving
that we aren’t just trying to be difficult; we’re really having a difficult time
inside. We also know that connection to others, identifying our strengths and
focusing on them instead of our weaknesses, setting up systems of structure
in our environments, getting exercise, and taking medication all really help
with these glitches and imbalances.
The other thing the world is starting to see is the tremendous potential—
creativity, entrepreneurial spirit, energy—of people with this condition. We
see the amazing accomplishments of people with ADHD every day in our
practices; as successful authors and clinicians with ADHD, we see this in
ourselves, too!
Now it’s time for all of us to join together and apply what we know so the
doors of opportunity, of creativity, and of understanding will open to people
of all ages with ADHD. We’ve written this book to show you where you
might find the keys to those doors.
While each chapter in this book highlights one finding, strategy, or
treatment to fit into your ADHD-coping puzzle, ultimately we know that you
will need to put the pieces together in your own unique way. If you play golf
(and even if you don’t), consider this conversational exchange between Dr.

might find the keys to those doors.
While each chapter in this book highlights one finding, strategy, or
treatment to fit into your ADHD-coping puzzle, ultimately we know that you
will need to put the pieces together in your own unique way. If you play golf
(and even if you don’t), consider this conversational exchange between Dr.
Hallowell and his brother-in-law, Chris, who is a golf pro in Virginia. Hidden
therein lies great advice for not only surviving but thriving with ADHD,
which we’ll explain.

, calmly: Ned, you just need to find your feel and make it real. And
remember that the key to putting is not caring if the ball goes in the hole.
.  (known as Ned), sputtering and incredulous: But, Chris, I’m
praying the ball goes in the hole. How could I possibly not care?
, ever the Yoda-like sage: You’ll putt better when you learn how.
This is, essentially, the advice this book has been offering throughout. We
want to help you find your feel and make it real. And we want to keep you out
of the success/failure trap that prevents so many people from achieving
happiness.
Just as everyone has their own style of putting, their own unique feel for
that devilish art, so each of us has our own style of living life, our own feel
for doing all we do. Look at your style, your feel. Is it truly yours or are you
imitating someone else’s? Most everything we do is part imitation, but what
makes each of us unique is what we add in on our own to create our
individuality, our special sauce, our style. Or as Dr. Hallowell wrote in his
poem to his five-year-old daughter, “No brain is the same, no brain is the
best, each brain finds its own special way.”
We’ve offered what we believe to be the best techniques all people with
ADHD can use, but whether you use them or how you use them—that you
have to personalize. Find your feel. What feels right for one of us won’t
necessarily feel right for you.
At the risk of alienating anyone who has never played golf, we need to
extend this golf-as-life metaphor just a little further. If you don’t play, you’ve
missed out on enjoying the feeling of hitting a perfect golf shot. Let us walk
you through it: You step up to the ball, you set your stance, and then you
swing. When it’s right, you don’t even feel the club hit the ball. You just swing
through it and, replacing brute force with beautifully balanced torque (when
you do it right), you launch that dimpled devil into flight. It quickly becomes
a fading dot, a shooting star, against the blue or cloudy sky.
The swing finished, the mechanical part of your performance complete,
you track the ball with mounting pride as it does what you’d hoped it would
do, what you dream it will do whenever you imagine playing golf, and your
heart fills with the joy of having made a perfect shot, having beaten golf at its

The swing finished, the mechanical part of your performance complete,
you track the ball with mounting pride as it does what you’d hoped it would
do, what you dream it will do whenever you imagine playing golf, and your
heart fills with the joy of having made a perfect shot, having beaten golf at its

own game and entropy to boot, having prevailed over the zillion factors that
could have gone wrong and turned your drive into a flub.
But no flub this time. This time you got it right. You nailed it. This time
you achieved the feeling you always seek but rarely find, the feeling of having
prevailed in the contest with whatever makes things go wrong, the feeling of
mastery over a foe you know will likely strike back hard next time. But this
time, this one fine time, you brought that foe down to defeat in one graceful
and glorious whooosh.
Okay, buddy, you say to yourself, do it again. How those words taunt
through eternity. Do it again. To do it again, consistently, that’s the dream we
all share but few of us achieve.
This is where the part about not caring if the ball drops into the hole
comes into play. Chris’s don’t-care advice may seem counterintuitive, but we
have learned it’s spot-on. It doesn’t mean you’re blasé. It just means your
focus is on the moment, not the outcome.
We leave you with our hope that you will stay in the game and focus on
the moment. Try to appreciate how silly and shallow an overemphasis on
winning truly is, and how shortsighted and unimaginative it is to allow defeat
to define you. Try to remember that life’s great reward, its greatest joy, lies in
the game itself—the trying to figure it out, the trying new ways to do so.
Revel in it. Suffer in it. Stick with it as if your life depends upon it, because it
does. Work at forever finding your feel and making it real. Cherish the great
shot, for sure. Nothing beats it. But, oddly, cherish the flub just as much. It
makes you want to try again and gives you something to shoot for. And, to
mangle the famous saying, flubbing reminds you what it is to be human: to
make mistakes.
Each of us finds a different way; there is no one right way. But what a
liberating message it is for us all to know that no brain is the best, and each of
us has the magnificent, lifelong chance to find our own brain’s special way.

For my loving wife, daughters, and grandchildren.
()
To Pippy, Honey, and Ziggy, who gave us all their frisky, licking love right up
to the moment they passed away.
And to the very much alive Layla and Max, who love us today in every way.
It is no accident that God spelled backward is Dog.
()

Acknowledgments
This is the part of book writing I like the best: thanking people, or what book
publishers call “the acknowledgments section.”
So first of all, let me thank our publisher, and more specifically our editor,
Marnie Cochran. To say that Marnie went above and beyond is to understate
in a major way her role in the creation of this book. The original manuscript
contained 120,000 words; the final version, the one you hold, 49,000 words.
Imagine the skill of an editor who can perform the plastic and bariatric
surgery required to reduce the weight, i.e., word count, of a book by 58
percent and leave the authors happy about it! Well, that’s what Marnie
managed to do. You, dear reader, should thank her for sparing you 70,000
unnecessary words.
I also thank the man who brokers my book deals and coaches me through

surgery required to reduce the weight, i.e., word count, of a book by 58
percent and leave the authors happy about it! Well, that’s what Marnie
managed to do. You, dear reader, should thank her for sparing you 70,000
unnecessary words.
I also thank the man who brokers my book deals and coaches me through
thinking up the next book. He is my esteemed agent, James (Jim) Levine, a
multitalented man with superb book instincts and a great team at his agency.
I thank the thousands of patients who have taught me ever since I was
doing research at the old Boston City Hospital prior to medical school in
1973. Patients have always been my best teachers.
I thank the many experts we consulted as we were creating this book, and
the many friends who also lent a hand. I especially thank my best friend,
Peter Metz, M.D., a fellow child psychiatrist off whom I bounced most of the
ideas in this book.
And of course I thank John Ratey, whom I first met in 1978 when he was
my chief resident at the old Massachusetts Mental Health Center. John

channeled Elvin Semrad beautifully for me and got me started sitting with
patients.
Above all, and always, my wife of thirty-two years, Sue, and our children,
Lucy, Jack, and Tucker. They add such sunshine, energy, and love to my life
every day that I can never thank them enough.
—E (N) H
I, too, take pleasure in thanking the people who have been instrumental in
getting this book started and completed. Grateful acknowledgment goes to
our editor, Marnie Cochran, who has done so much to hone the book into its
current form. She has been tireless and exacting in corralling our thoughts
and focusing our energies.
I’m also deeply indebted to Ned Hallowell, my student, now teacher, and
treasured friend over these many years. He provided the spark to take on the
challenge of writing a new book together and once again penned his thoughts,
and mine, to bring us this latest achievement.
Thanks also to my mentors of the past, George Vaillant, Allan Hobson,
and Richard Shader, who were not put off by my ADHD enthusiasm but
encouraged and guided me to “go for it.” And to my business partner and
wonderful friend Ben Lopez, who taught me to reach beyond the norm. As
always, I am also eternally beholden to my patients over the years, who have
shared their lives with me and taught me so much.
Finally, I gratefully acknowledge my wife, Alicia Ulrich, who has been a
partner in interviewing and thinking about my parts of the manuscript, along
with being a true and honest sounding board. It is her love, and the love of my
daughters, Jessie and Kathryn, and grandchildren, Gracie and Callum, that
makes everything I do worthwhile.
—J R

Appendix A
THE DIAGNOSTIC AND STATISTICAL MANUAL OF MENTAL
DISORDERS DEFINITION OF AND CRITERIA FOR ADHD (ABRIDGED)
People with ADHD show a persistent pattern of inattention and/or
hyperactivity—impulsivity that interferes with functioning or development:
1. Inattention: Six or more symptoms of inattention for children up to age
16, or five or more for adolescents 17 and older and adults; symptoms of
inattention have been present for at least 6 months, and they are
inappropriate for developmental level:
◦ Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless
mistakes in schoolwork, at work, or with other activities.
◦ Often has trouble holding attention on tasks or play activities.
◦ Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly.

inattention have been present for at least 6 months, and they are
inappropriate for developmental level:
◦ Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless
mistakes in schoolwork, at work, or with other activities.
◦ Often has trouble holding attention on tasks or play activities.
◦ Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly.
◦ Often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish
schoolwork, chores, or duties in the workplace (e.g., loses focus,
becomes sidetracked).
◦ Often has trouble organizing tasks and activities.
◦ Often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to do tasks that require mental
effort over a long period of time (such as schoolwork or
homework).
◦ Often loses things necessary for tasks and activities (e.g., school
materials, pencils, books, tools, wallets, keys, paperwork,
eyeglasses, mobile telephones).
◦ Is often easily distracted.

◦ Is often forgetful in daily activities.
2. Hyperactivity and Impulsivity: Six or more symptoms of hyperactivity-
impulsivity for children up to age 16, or five or more for adolescents 17
and older and adults; symptoms of hyperactivity-impulsivity have been
present for at least 6 months to an extent that is disruptive and
inappropriate for the person’s developmental level:
◦ Often fidgets with or taps hands or feet, or squirms in seat.
◦ Often leaves seat in situations when remaining seated is expected.
◦ Often runs about or climbs in situations where it is not appropriate
(adolescents or adults may be limited to feeling restless).
◦ Often is unable to play or take part in leisure activities quietly.
◦ Is often “on the go,” acting as if “driven by a motor.”
◦ Often talks excessively.
◦ Often blurts out an answer before a question has been completed.
◦ Often has trouble waiting his/her turn.
◦ Often interrupts or intrudes on others (e.g., butts into conversations
or games).
In addition, the following conditions must be met:
Several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms were present
before age 12 years.
Several symptoms are present in two or more settings (such as at
home, school, or work; with friends or relatives; in other activities).
There is clear evidence that the symptoms interfere with, or reduce
the quality of, social, school, or work functioning.
The symptoms are not better explained by another mental disorder
(such as a mood disorder, anxiety disorder, dissociative disorder, or a
personality disorder). The symptoms do not happen only during the
course of schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder.
Based on the types of symptoms, three kinds (presentations) of ADHD
can occur:

Combined Presentation: if enough symptoms of both criteria inattention
and hyperactivity-impulsivity were present for the past 6 months
Predominantly Inattentive Presentation: if enough symptoms of
inattention, but not hyperactivity-impulsivity, were present for the past
six months
Predominantly Hyperactive-Impulsive Presentation: if enough symptoms
of hyperactivity-impulsivity, but not inattention, were present for the past
six months.
Because symptoms can change over time, the presentation may change
over time as well.
DIAGNOSING ADHD IN ADULTS
ADHD often lasts into adulthood. To diagnose ADHD in adults and
adolescents age 17 or older, only 5 symptoms are needed instead of the 6
needed for younger children. Symptoms might look different at older ages.
For example, in adults, hyperactivity may appear as extreme restlessness or

DIAGNOSING ADHD IN ADULTS
ADHD often lasts into adulthood. To diagnose ADHD in adults and
adolescents age 17 or older, only 5 symptoms are needed instead of the 6
needed for younger children. Symptoms might look different at older ages.
For example, in adults, hyperactivity may appear as extreme restlessness or
wearing others out with their activity.

Appendix B
A COMPENDIUM OF RESOURCES
EDWARD M. HALLOWELL, M.D.
www.drhallowell.com
Provides resources containing the latest information and treatment
recommendations on ADD/ADHD for people of all ages, plus advice on
parenting, academics, work/life/home concerns, relationships, and more.
TREATMENT CENTERS FOR PEOPLE OF ALL AGES WITH ADHD
THE HALLOWELL CENTERS
www.drhallowell.com
Each Hallowell Center practices the Hallowell Strength-Based comprehensive
evaluation and innovative multidisciplinary treatment for ADHD and other
mental health concerns, rooted in the practices, philosophy, and writings of
Dr. Hallowell.
California
HALLOWELL TODARO ADHD CENTER PALO ALTO
www.hallowelltodaro.com
650-446-4900
Rooted in Dr. Hallowell’s Strength-Based approach, this practice is
interdisciplinary, like the other Hallowell Centers. Dr. Hallowell teamed up
with an extraordinary clinician, Lesley Todaro, LMFTA, CDPT, to found this
center.

HALLOWELL CENTER SAN FRANCISCO
www.hallowellsfo.com
415-967-0061
Comprehensive evaluation and multidisciplinary, innovative Hallowell
Strength-Based treatments and integrative approaches for ADHD, depression,
anxiety, relationship/career/education/life issues, and other mental health
concerns.
Massachusetts
THE HALLOWELL CENTER BOSTON METROWEST
www.drhallowellsudbury.com
978-287-0810
This is the first Hallowell Center, opened in 1996. Dr. Hallowell splits his
private practice time between his center in Boston MetroWest and New York.
The Boston facility has a staff of more than twenty clinicians who specialize
in the Hallowell Strength-Based treatment of ADHD in children and adults.
New York
Manhattan and Surrounding Areas
THE HALLOWELL CENTER NYC
www.hallowellcenter.org
212-799-7777
Dr. Hallowell splits his private practice time between his centers in Boston
MetroWest and New York. The New York facility has a staff of more than
twenty clinicians who specialize in the Hallowell Strength-Based treatment of
ADHD in children and adults.
Washington
Kirkland and Seattle
HALLOWELL-TODARO ADHD CENTER
www.hallowelltodarocenter.org
206-420-7345

Rooted in Dr. Hallowell’s Strength-Based approach, this practice is
interdisciplinary, like the other Hallowell Centers. Dr. Hallowell teamed up
with an extraordinary clinician, Lesley Todaro, LMFTA, CDPT, to found this
center. Ms. Todaro runs the center with her team of clinicians and
administrators.
Centers Using Dr. Hallowell’s Strength-Based Approach
Massachusetts
Hingham
CENTER FOR INTEGRATIVE COUNSELING AND WELLNESS
www.centerforintegrativecounselingandwellness.com
781-749-9227
Email: info@CenterforIntegrativeCounselingandWellness.com
The center offers a range of services from traditional psychotherapy and
psychiatry to holistic approaches, including Dr. Hallowell’s Strength-Based
approach to treating ADHD, all available in one convenient location.
SUPPORT, EDUCATION, AND ADVOCACY ORGANIZATIONS
The organizations listed below offer information and support to those in need.
Call to locate an office or support group near you, as well as to obtain a list of

psychiatry to holistic approaches, including Dr. Hallowell’s Strength-Based
approach to treating ADHD, all available in one convenient location.
SUPPORT, EDUCATION, AND ADVOCACY ORGANIZATIONS
The organizations listed below offer information and support to those in need.
Call to locate an office or support group near you, as well as to obtain a list of
their individual publications and membership information.
ADHD Organizations
A.D.D. RESOURCE CENTER
www.addrc.org
646-205-8080
Proven, practical program and services for dealing with ADD/ADHD.
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF CHILD AND ADOLESCENT PSYCHIATRY
www.aacap.org
202-966-7300

Though not specifically an ADHD-oriented organization, child and adolescent
psychiatrists can be an enormous help in supporting you or your child.
AMERICAN PSYCHOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION (APA)
www.apa.org/topics/adhd/index.aspx
800-374-2721
The APA is not specifically focused on ADHD issues, but it is the leading
scientific and professional organization representing psychology in the United
States, with more than 117,500 researchers, educators, clinicians, consultants,
and students as its members.
ATTENTION DEFICIT DISORDER ASSOCIATION (ADDA)
www.add.org
800-939-1019
Provides information, resources, and networking opportunities to help adults
with ADHD lead better lives.
CENTER FOR MANAGEMENT OF ADHD RESOURCES
Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia
www.chop.edu/centers-programs/center-management-adhd/health-resources
800-879-2467
Provides ADHD resources for educators, parents, caregivers, and adults.
CENTER FOR PARENT INFORMATION AND RESOURCES (CPIR)
www.parentcenterhub.org/
Email: malizo@spannj.org
CPIR serves as a central resource of information and products to the
community of Parent Training Information (PTI) Centers and the
Community Parent Resource Centers (CPRCs) so that they can focus their
efforts on serving families of children with disabilities.
CHADD (CHILDREN AND ADULTS WITH ATTENTION DEFICIT DISORDER)
www.CHADD.org
301-306-7070

CHADD provides support, training, education, and advocacy and works to
ensure that those with ADHD reach their inherent potential. As home to the
National Resource Center on ADHD, funded by the U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, CHADD is the most trusted source of reliable,
science-based information regarding current medical research and ADHD
management.
CHILD MIND INSTITUTE
www.childmind.org
212-308-3118
The Child Mind Institute is an independent national nonprofit dedicated to
transforming the lives of children and families struggling with mental health
and learning disorders.
EYE TO EYE
www.eyetoeyenational.org
212-537-4429, 628-400-4106
Founded and run by David Flink, Eye to Eye provides mentors for high
school and college students who have learning differences.
HEALTHYCHILDREN.ORG
www.healthychildren.org/English/health-issues/conditions/adhd/Pages/
Understanding-ADHD.aspx
Provides information and resources for parents on ADHD.
NATIONAL RESEARCH CENTER ON ADHD
www.help4adhd.org
800-233-4050
The nation’s clearinghouse for evidence-based information on ADHD.
Learning Disabilities Organizations
COUNCIL FOR EXCEPTIONAL CHILDREN (CEC)
www.cec.sped.org
703-620-3660

Understanding-ADHD.aspx
Provides information and resources for parents on ADHD.
NATIONAL RESEARCH CENTER ON ADHD
www.help4adhd.org
800-233-4050
The nation’s clearinghouse for evidence-based information on ADHD.
Learning Disabilities Organizations
COUNCIL FOR EXCEPTIONAL CHILDREN (CEC)
www.cec.sped.org
703-620-3660

A nonprofit organization with seventeen specialized divisions. DLD (see
below) is the division dedicated to learning disabilities. It provides free
information and holds conferences.
COUNCIL FOR LEARNING DISABILITIES (CLD)
www.cldinternational.org
913-491-1011
CLD, an international organization composed of professionals who represent
diverse disciplines, is committed to enhancing the education and quality of
life for individuals with learning disabilities across the life span.
DIVISION FOR LEARNING DISABILITIES (DLD)
www.teachingld.org
DLD is an international professional organization consisting of teachers,
psychologists, clinicians, administrators, higher education professionals,
parents, and others.
HELPGUIDE
www.helpguide.org/articles/add-adhd/attention-deficit-disorder-adhd-
parenting-tips.htm
Comprehensive guide for resources for mental, emotional, and social health.
INTERNATIONAL DYSLEXIA ASSOCIATION (IDA)
www.interdys.org
410-296-0232, 800-222-3123
Email: info@interdys.org
IDA is the oldest organization dedicated to the study and treatment of
dyslexia. The society has more than forty branches throughout the United
States and Canada that offer informational meetings and support groups.
Referrals are made for persons seeking resources.
LEARNING DISABILITIES ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA (LDA)
www.ldaamerica.org
412-341-1515

Email: info@ldaamerica.org
LDA believes that every person with learning disabilities can be successful at
school, at work, in relationships, and in the community, given the right
opportunities.
MENTAL HEALTH AMERICA (MHA)
www.mentalhealthamerica.net
MHA is dedicated to addressing the needs of those living with mental illness
and to promoting the overall mental health of all Americans.
NATIONAL CENTER FOR LEARNING DISABILITIES (NCLD)
www.ncld.org
Founded in 1977, NCLD provides resources to improve the lives of children
and adults nationwide with learning and attention issues, by empowering
parents and young adults, transforming schools, and advocating for equal
rights and opportunities.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR LEARNING DEVELOPMENT (NILD)
www.nild.org
757-423-8646
Since 1973, NILD has developed its own individualized educational therapy
to build competence and confidence in all learners, which includes a special
form of tutoring, combined with exercises that stimulate certain parts of the
brain. NILD has six hundred active therapists in thirty-five states and sixteen
countries.
PARENT TO PARENT USA
www.p2pusa.org
Provides emotional and informational support for families of children who
have special needs.
UNDERSTOOD
www.understood.org
Email: support@understood.org

form of tutoring, combined with exercises that stimulate certain parts of the
brain. NILD has six hundred active therapists in thirty-five states and sixteen
countries.
PARENT TO PARENT USA
www.p2pusa.org
Provides emotional and informational support for families of children who
have special needs.
UNDERSTOOD
www.understood.org
Email: support@understood.org

Understood is a free online resource and community supporting millions of
parents of kids with learning and attention issues by offering personalized
recommendations, free daily access to experts, and a safe community.
Understood was created by fifteen nonprofit partners in October 2014 to
empower parents to help their kids thrive in school and in life.
Organizations Devoted to Disorders Related to ADHD
DEPRESSION AND BIPOLAR SUPPORT ALLIANCE (DBSA)
www.dbsalliance.org
800-826-3632
DBSA provides hope, help, support, and education to improve the lives of
people who have mood disorders.
FEDERATION FOR CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS
www.fcsn.org
617-236-7210, 800-331-0688
Email: fcsninfo@fcsn.org
Provides information, support, and assistance to parents of children with
disabilities, their professional partners, and their communities.
JUVENILE BIPOLAR RESEARCH FOUNDATION
https://www.jbrf.org/
914-468-1297
Email: info@jbrf.org
Promotes and supports scientific research focused on the cause of and
treatments for bipolar disorder in children.
NATIONAL ALLIANCE FOR THE MENTALLY ILL (NAMI)
www.nami.org
703-524-7600, 800-950-6264
NAMI, the nation’s largest grassroots mental health organization, is dedicated
to building better lives for the millions of Americans affected by mental
illness.

TOURETTE ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA
www.tsa-usa.org
718-224-2999
Email: ts@tsa-usa.org
Offers resources and referrals to help people and their families cope with the
problems that accompany Tourette syndrome.
Laws, Accommodations, and Employment Resources
ASSOCIATION ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND DISABILITY (AHEAD)
www.ahead.org
704-947-7779
AHEAD is a professional membership organization for individuals involved
in the development of policy and in the provision of quality services to meet
the needs of persons with disabilities involved in all areas of higher education.
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION (EEOC)
www.eeoc.gov
202-663-4900
Email: info@eeoc.gov
Provides information on employment issues, federal laws, and discrimination.
JOB ACCOMMODATION NETWORK
www.jan.wvu.edu
800-526-7234
Email: jan@askjan.org
A free consulting service that provides information about job
accommodations, the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the
employability of people with disabilities.
OFFICE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS—OCR (U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION)
www2.ed.gov/policy/landing.jhtml?src=pn
800-872-5327

OCR ensures equal access to education and promotes educational excellence
throughout the nation through enforcement of civil rights. Contact OCR for
Section 504–related issues.
Magazines, Newsletters, Podcasts, and Radio
ADDITUDE MAGAZINE
www.additudemag.com
888-762-8475
Email: additude@additudemag.com
National bimonthly magazine for the ADHD community. Dr. Hallowell
writes a regular column for this magazine.
THE ADHD REPORT BY RUSSELL A. BARKLEY, PH.D.
www.russellbarkley.org/newsletter.html
In 1993, Dr. Barkley founded The ADHD Report with Guilford Publications.
This bimonthly newsletter is designed for clinicians and knowledgeable
parents to provide them with the latest scientific information on ADHD. It

THE ADHD REPORT BY RUSSELL A. BARKLEY, PH.D.
www.russellbarkley.org/newsletter.html
In 1993, Dr. Barkley founded The ADHD Report with Guilford Publications.
This bimonthly newsletter is designed for clinicians and knowledgeable
parents to provide them with the latest scientific information on ADHD. It
contains insights and cutting-edge techniques of today’s leading authorities on
ADHD. Dr. Barkley is one of the pioneers in the field of ADHD.
ATTENTION MAGAZINE
www.chadd.org/membership/attention-magazine.aspx
Published quarterly, this publication is available with CHADD membership.
ATTENTION TALK RADIO
www.attentiontalkradio.com
The leading site for self-help Internet radio shows focusing on ADHD,
including managing symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
Target audience is adults with ADHD and adults who have children with
ADHD.
DISTRACTION PODCAST
www.distractionpodcast.com
844-552-6663

Email: connect@distractionpodcast.com
Dr. Hallowell hosts a twice-weekly podcast called Distraction, which explores
how we are driven to distraction and offers coping strategies for managing
ADHD, technology, your crazy-busy life, and more. It can be downloaded
and subscribed to on iTunes, Google Play Music, Stitcher, or the Distraction
website.
Coaching Resources
ADDA COACH REGISTER
www.add.org/professional-directory
Listing of ADHD coaches throughout the United States, Canada, and Puerto
Rico.
ADD COACH ACADEMY
www.ADDCA.com
800-915-7702
Email: info@addca.com
Founded by David Giwerc, a pioneer in the coaching field. Great resource for
finding a coach or becoming a coach.
ADD CONSULTS
www.addconsults.com
800-615-9786
Email: terry@addconsults.com
Helps women with ADHD get unstuck and on track. Provides private,
personal ADHD consultations, both nationally and internationally, via email.
AMERICAN COACHING ASSOCIATION
www.americoach.org
610-825-8572
ACA’s mission is to link people who want coaching with people who do
coaching, to acquaint the general public with the concept of coaching, and to
provide coaches with training, supervision, and a professional community.

BLUBERYL
www.bluberyl.com
978-225-0625
Email: info@bluberyl.com
BLUBERYL is a strength-based productivity and executive function coaching
company that helps students and adults recognize and make the most of their
own learning styles and preferences. BLUBERYL’s proprietary programs and
products teach clients how to become more organized and efficient at home,
in school, and in their careers.
DIG COACHING PRACTICE
www.digcoaching.com/
813-837-8084
Email: jeff@digcoaching.com
Jeff Copper is an accredited, certified ADHD coach who helps others to
overcome information overload, chronic disorganization, time blindness,
procrastination, and all the ADHD symptoms related to self-regulation,
impulsivity, distractibility, and other issues that may hinder one’s
advancement. Jeff specializes in working with adults, college students, and
entrepreneurs.
IMPACT ADHD
www.impactadhd.com
888-535-6507
Email: theteam@impactadhd.com
Provides coaching, parenting programs, and resources for parents raising
ADHD kids.
PTS COACHING: ADHD TRAINING, EDUCATION, AND SUPPORT
www.PTScoaching.com
516-802-0593
Email: info@PTScoaching.com
Creating pathways to success for parents, teachers, and students.

888-535-6507
Email: theteam@impactadhd.com
Provides coaching, parenting programs, and resources for parents raising
ADHD kids.
PTS COACHING: ADHD TRAINING, EDUCATION, AND SUPPORT
www.PTScoaching.com
516-802-0593
Email: info@PTScoaching.com
Creating pathways to success for parents, teachers, and students.

LESLIE ROUCER, COACH THERAPIST
www.addadults.net
561-706-1274
Email: leslie@addadults.net
Specializing in adult ADHD.
NANCY SNELL
www.nancysnell.com
212-517-6488
Certified professional business/ADHD coach, NYC, helping adults with
productivity, business, and ADHD coaching since 2003.
ADHD Educational Materials
ADD WAREHOUSE
www.addwarehouse.com
800-233-9273
Email: websales@addwarehouse.com
Mail-order and online catalog of resources on ADHD, oppositional defiant
disorder, Asperger’s syndrome, autism, Tourette syndrome, and learning
problems. It offers a wide variety of books, videos, and other resource
materials.
Additional Web Resources
HABYTS
www.habyts.com
Email: contact@habyts.com
Habyts helps families build good habits for life, including helping parents
manage screen time and motivate their kids to do chores and homework.
LD ONLINE
www.ldonline.org
LD OnLine seeks to help children and adults reach their full potential by
providing accurate and up-to-date information and advice about learning

disabilities and ADHD.
PSYCHOLOGY TODAY
www.psychologytoday.com/us
This long-running publication offers the best online directory of therapists,
psychologists, and counselors and the latest news from the world of
psychology, from behavioral research to practical guidance on relationships
and mental health, including addiction.
SUGGESTED READINGS
For Children Who Have ADHD
Dendy, Chris A. Zeigler, and Alex Zeigler. A Bird’s-Eye View of Life with
ADD and ADHD: Advice from Young Survivors. Cedar Bluff, AL: Cherish
the Children, 2003. (Written for teens by twelve teens and a young adult.)
Hallowell, Edward M., M.D. A Walk in the Rain with a Brain. New York:
Regan Books/HarperCollins, 2004. An illustrated children’s story (for
ages four to twelve), the moral of which is that the words “smart” and
“stupid” mean very little; what matters is finding what you love, then
doing it. As Manfred the brain says in the story, “No brain is the same, no
brain is the best, each brain finds its own special way.”
Lowry, Mark, and Martha Bolton. Piper’s Night Before Christmas. West
Monroe, LA: Howard Publishing, 1998. This is the first in a series of four
books; the others are Nighttime Is Just Daytime with Your Eyes Closed
(1999), Piper Steals the Show (2000), and Piper’s Twisted Tale (2001).
Having grown up with ADHD, Mark Lowry readily identifies with the
character in his books, Piper the Hyperactive Mouse. Mark is a
multitalented artist who is a comedian, singer, and songwriter, as well as
co-author of these children’s books. Each book comes with a CD of Mark
narrating the story.
Mooney, Jonathan, and David Cole. Learning Outside the Lines. New York:
Touchstone, 2000. Two Ivy League students with learning disabilities and
ADHD give you the tools for academic success and educational
revolution.

co-author of these children’s books. Each book comes with a CD of Mark
narrating the story.
Mooney, Jonathan, and David Cole. Learning Outside the Lines. New York:
Touchstone, 2000. Two Ivy League students with learning disabilities and
ADHD give you the tools for academic success and educational
revolution.

Moss, Deborah. Shelley, the Hyperactive Turtle. Bethesda, MD: Woodbine
House, 1989. The delightful story of a bright young turtle who is not like
all the other turtles. Shelley moves like a rocket and is unable to sit still
for even the shortest periods of time.
For Parents of Children Who Have ADHD
Barkley, Russell A., Ph.D. Taking Charge of ADHD: The Complete,
Authoritative Guide for Parents. New York: Guilford Press, 2000. A
parent resource incorporating the most current information on ADHD
and its treatment.
Braaten, Ellen, and Brian Willoughby. Bright Kids Who Can’t Keep Up. New
York: Guilford Press, 2014. Filled with vivid stories and examples of kids
and teens who struggle with an area of cognitive functioning called
“processing speed,” this crucial resource demystifies processing speed and
shows how to help kids (ages five to eighteen) catch up in this key area of
development.
Brooks, Robert, Ph.D., and Sam Goldstein, Ph.D. Raising Resilient Children:
Fostering Strength, Hope, and Optimism in Your Child. New York:
McGraw-Hill/Contemporary Books, 2002. This book explains how to
help children become emotionally and mentally strong to face the
challenges of modern life.
Flink, David. Thinking Differently. New York: HarperCollins, 2014. An
innovative, comprehensive guide—the first of its kind—to help parents
understand and accept learning disabilities in their children, offering tips
and strategies for successfully advocating on their behalf and helping them
become their own best advocates.
Galinsky, Ellen. Mind in the Making: The Seven Essential Life Skills Every
Child Needs. New York: HarperStudio, 2010. This book presents
groundbreaking advice based on the latest research on child development.
Goldrich, Cindy. 8 Keys to Parenting Children with ADHD. New York: W. W.
Norton, 2015. Based on the author’s seven-session workshop entitled
“Calm and Connected: Parenting Kids with ADHD,” this book focuses on
developing and strengthening effective interpersonal skills in both parents
and children as a way to improve conflict resolution.

Greene, Ross, Ph.D. The Explosive Child. New York: HarperCollins, 1998. A
practical approach to treating spirited children. Dr. Greene explains that
the difficulties of these children stem from brain-based deficits in the
ability to be flexible and to handle frustration.
Hallowell, Edward M., M.D. The Childhood Roots of Adult Happiness. New
York: Ballantine, 2003. A succinct, practical, evidence-based guide for
parents on how to raise children in a way that will maximize the chances
of their becoming happy, successful adults, whether or not they have
ADHD.
Hallowell, Edward M., M.D., and Peter Jensen. Superparenting for ADD: An
Innovative Approach to Raising Your Distracted Child. New York:
Ballantine, 2008. Superparenting shows you how to unwrap the wonderful,
surprising gifts of ADHD and turn what is too often labeled a lifelong
disability into a lifelong blessing.
Jensen, Peter S., M.D. Making the System Work for Your Child with ADHD.
New York: Guilford Press, 2004.
Kenney, Lynne, and Wendy Young. Bloom: 50 Things to Say, Think, and Do

Ballantine, 2008. Superparenting shows you how to unwrap the wonderful,
surprising gifts of ADHD and turn what is too often labeled a lifelong
disability into a lifelong blessing.
Jensen, Peter S., M.D. Making the System Work for Your Child with ADHD.
New York: Guilford Press, 2004.
Kenney, Lynne, and Wendy Young. Bloom: 50 Things to Say, Think, and Do
with Anxious, Angry, and Over-the-Top-Kids. Boca Raton, FL: HCI Press,
2015. Written for parents with anxious, angry, and over-the-top kids,
Bloom is a brain-based approach to parenting all children.
Krauss, Elaine, and Diane Dempster. Parenting ADHD Now! Easy
Intervention Strategies to Empower Kids with ADHD. New York: Althea
Press, 2016. This book is packed with helpful real-life, hands-on tips and
tricks to help you parent your child with ADHD.
Morin, Amanda. The Everything Parent’s Guide to Special Education: A
Complete Step-by-Step Guide to Advocating for Your Child with Special
Needs. Avon, MA: Adams Media, 2014. This valuable handbook gives
you the tools you need to navigate the complex world of special education
and services.
———. The Everything Kids’ Learning Activities Book: 145 Entertaining
Activities and Learning Games for Kids. Avon, MA: Adams Media, 2013.
Silver, Larry, M.D. Dr. Larry Silver’s Advice to Parents on ADHD. New York:
Three Rivers Press, 1999. This resource addresses the subjects all parents
wonder about when they suspect their child has ADHD: causes, signs to

look for, getting an accurate diagnosis, latest information on medications
and other treatments.
Volpitta, Donna M., and Joel David Haber, Ph.D. The Resilience Formula: A
Guide to Proactive, Not Reactive, Parenting. Chester, PA: Widener, 2012.
The Resilience Formula is a plan for proactive parenting—parenting that
teaches resilience to children through everyday challenges.
Wilens, Timothy E., M.D. Straight Talk About Psychiatric Medications for
Kids. 4th ed. New York: Guilford Press, 2016. With numerous real-life
examples, answers to frequently asked questions, and helpful tables and
charts, Harvard University researcher and practitioner Timothy Wilens
explains which medications may be prescribed for children and why.
For Adults Who Have ADHD
Barkley, Russell A., Ph.D. Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A
Handbook for Diagnosis and Treatment. 4th ed. New York: Guilford
Press, 2014.
Barkley, Russell A., Ph.D., and C. M. Benton. Taking Charge of Adult
ADHD. New York: Guilford Press, 2010.
Hallowell, Edward M., M.D., and Sue Hallowell, LICSW, with Melissa
Orlov. Married to Distraction: How to Restore Intimacy and Strengthen
Your Partnership in an Age of Interruption. New York: Ballantine, 2010.
Hartmann, Thom. Attention Deficit Disorder: A Different Perception. Nevada
City, CA: Underwood Books, 1997. Thom Hartmann explains some of
the positive characteristics sometimes associated with ADHD and
provides an explanation of the disorder that can help adults at home, at
work, and in school.
Kelly, Kate, and Peggy Ramundo. You Mean I’m Not Lazy, Stupid, or Crazy?!
A Self-Help Book for Adults with Attention Deficit Disorder. New York:
Scribner, 1996.
Kolberg, Judith, and Kathleen Nadeau, Ph.D. ADD-Friendly Ways to
Organize Your Life. East Sussex, UK: Brunner-Routledge, 2002. This
collaboration brings together the best understanding of the disorder with
the most effective and practical remedies from ADHD experts in two

A Self-Help Book for Adults with Attention Deficit Disorder. New York:
Scribner, 1996.
Kolberg, Judith, and Kathleen Nadeau, Ph.D. ADD-Friendly Ways to
Organize Your Life. East Sussex, UK: Brunner-Routledge, 2002. This
collaboration brings together the best understanding of the disorder with
the most effective and practical remedies from ADHD experts in two
important fields: professional organization and clinical psychology.

Novotni, Michele, Ph.D. What Does Everybody Else Know That I Don’t?
Social Skills Help for Adults with Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
(AD/HD). Forest Lake, MN: Specialty Press, 1999. Social skills help for
ADHD adults.
Solden, Sari, M.S., LMFT. Women with Attention Deficit Disorder. 2nd ed.
Ann Arbor: Introspect Press, 2012. Sari Solden combines real-life
histories, treatment experiences, and recent clinical research to highlight
the special challenges facing women with attention deficit disorder.
———. Journeys Through ADDulthood. London: Walker, 2002. Offers a
wealth of wisdom, sound advice, reassuring experiences, and hope for
adults with ADHD.
General Books on ADHD
Brown, T. E. Attention Deficit Disorder: The Unfocused Mind in Children and
Adults. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2005.
———. Smart but Stuck: Emotions in Teens and Adults with ADHD.
Hoboken, NJ: Jossey-Bass/Wiley, 2014.
Corman, C. A., and Edward M. Hallowell, M.D. Positively ADD: Real Success
Stories to Inspire Your Dreams. London: Walker, 2006.
Dawson, P., and R. Guare. Smart but Scattered: The Revolutionary “Executive
Skills” to Helping Kids Reach Their Potential. New York: Guilford Press,
2009.
Dendy, Chris A. Zeigler. Teenagers with ADD: A Parents’ Guide. Bethesda,
MD: Woodbine House, 1995.
Gallagher, R., H. B. Abikoff, and E. G. Spira. Organizational Skills Training
for Children with ADHD: An Empirically Supported Treatment. New York:
Guilford Press, 2014.
Hallowell, Edward M., M.D., and John J. Ratey, M.D. Driven to Distraction:
Recognizing and Coping with Attention Deficit Disorder from Childhood
Through Adulthood. New York: Pantheon, 1994.
———. Answers to Distraction. New York: Bantam, 1996.
———. Delivered from Distraction. New York: Ballantine, 2005.
Hinshaw, S. P., and K. Ellison. ADHD: What Everyone Needs to Know. New
York: Oxford University Press, 2015.

Hinshaw, S. P., and R. M. Scheffler. The ADHD Explosion: Myths,
Medication, Money, and Today’s Push for Performance. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2014.
Jensen, Peter S., M.D., and James R. Cooper, M.D., eds. Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder: State of the Science, Best Practices. Kingston, NJ:
Civic Research Institute, 2002. This is the most comprehensive,
authoritative academic volume on the topic available today. Jensen and
Cooper bring together various points of view in this superb reference
book.
Kaufman, C. Executive Function in the Classroom. Baltimore: Brookes
Publishing, 2010.
Kohlberg, J., and K. Nadeau. ADD-Friendly Ways to Organize Your Life. East
Sussex, UK: Brunner-Routledge, 2002.
Lavoie, Richard. It’s So Much Work to Be Your Friend: Helping the Child with
Learning Disabilities Find Social Success. New York: Touchstone, 2006.
Lovecky, D. Different Minds: Gifted Children with ADHD, Asperger’s
Syndrome, and Other Learning Deficits. London: Jessica Kingsley, 2004.
Matlen, Terry. The Queen of Distraction: How Women with ADHD Can
Conquer Chaos, Find Focus, and Get More Done. Oakland, CA: New

Learning Disabilities Find Social Success. New York: Touchstone, 2006.
Lovecky, D. Different Minds: Gifted Children with ADHD, Asperger’s
Syndrome, and Other Learning Deficits. London: Jessica Kingsley, 2004.
Matlen, Terry. The Queen of Distraction: How Women with ADHD Can
Conquer Chaos, Find Focus, and Get More Done. Oakland, CA: New
Harbinger, 2014.
Nadeau, K., and P. Quinn, eds. Understanding Women with ADHD. San
Diego: Advantage Books, 2002.
Orlov, Melissa. The ADHD Effect on Marriage. Boca Raton, FL: Specialty
Press/ADD WareHouse, 2010.
Quinn, P. Coaching. San Diego: Advantage Books, 2000.
Ratey, John J., M.D., and Eric Hagerman. Spark: The Revolutionary New
Science of Exercise and the Brain. Boston: Little, Brown, 2008.
Richardson, W. The Link Between ADD and Addiction. Seattle: Piñon Press,
1997.
Rief, S. F. How to Reach and Teach Children with ADD/ADHD. 2nd ed.
Hoboken, NJ: Jossey-Bass, 2005.
Schultz, J. Nowhere to Hide: Why Kids with ADHD and LD Hate School and
What to Do About It. Hoboken, NJ: Jossey-Bass, 2011.

Sleeper-Triplett, J. Empowering Youth with ADHD: Your Guide to Coaching
Adolescents and Young Adults, for Coaches, Parents, and Professionals.
Forest Lake, MN: Specialty Press, 2010.
Solden, Sari, M.S., LMFT. Women with Attention Deficit Disorder. 2nd ed.
Ann Arbor: Introspect Press, 2012.
Surman, C., and T. Bilkey. Fast Minds: How to Thrive If You Have ADHD (or
Think You Might). New York: Berkley Books, 2014.
Tuckman, A. More Attention, Less Deficit: Success Stories for Adults with
ADHD. Boca Raton, FL: Specialty Press, 2009.
Vail, Priscilla. Smart Kids with School Problems: Things to Know and Ways to
Help. New York: Plume, 1989. The late Priscilla Vail, a true pioneer and
an exceptional woman, introduced me to the world of learning
differences. This book is a classic, along with one of her other books,
Emotion: The On-Off Switch for Learning.
Wilens, Timothy E., M.D. Straight Talk About Psychiatric Medications for
Kids. 4th ed. New York: Guilford Press, 2016.
STATE-BY-STATE SUPPORT AND EDUCATION GROUPS
What follows is a rundown of recommended support and education groups
organized by state, and within each state (where applicable) by city. You may
notice that there are some states for which there is nothing listed. This is not
to suggest that you are on your own in those states. Not at all! Rather, when
we have not listed a state, it is because we were not able to confirm the
contact information by the time this book went to press. That said, please
note that the terrific national organization CHADD has branches in every
state. Where we have worked with or been in close contact with a CHADD
local branch, we have listed that branch within this state listing. But you can
go to the CHADD website at www.chadd.org or call their national
information line at 800-233-4050 to get the specifics of contact information
where you live.
Arizona
Scottsdale

state. Where we have worked with or been in close contact with a CHADD
local branch, we have listed that branch within this state listing. But you can
go to the CHADD website at www.chadd.org or call their national
information line at 800-233-4050 to get the specifics of contact information
where you live.
Arizona
Scottsdale

ATTENTION DEFICIT DISORDER CLINIC
www.add-clinic.com
480-424-7200
Tucson
CHADD OF TUCSON (ADULT AND PARENT SUPPORT GROUPS)
www.chaddoftucson.com/chadd-of-tucson/
520-327-7002
Arkansas
Jonesboro
FOCUS, INC.
www.focusinc.org
870-935-2750
Focus targets individuals with developmental disabilities, particularly those
who are underserved, either because of the severity of the disability or
because of the lack of family and community support.
California
Alameda, Butte, Contra Costa, Humboldt, Lake, Marin, Mendocino,
Monterey, Napa, Nevada, Sacramento, San Benito, San Francisco, San
Joaquin, San Mateo, Santa Clara, Santa Cruz, Sonoma, and Yolo counties
CHADD OF NORTHERN CALIFORNIA
www.chaddnorcal.org
Palo Alto
HALLOWELL TODARO CENTER
www.hallowelltodaro.com
650-446-4900
San Diego
LEARNING DEVELOPMENT SERVICES
www.learningdevelopmentservices.com

858-581-5050
Email: learndev@aol.com
Providing services for adults, parents, and children.
San Francisco
HALLOWELL CENTER
www.drhallowell.com/san-francisco/
415-967-0061
Colorado
Castle Rock
INSPIRE THE FAMILY
303-229-3348
Email: inspirethefamily@gmail.com
Connecticut
Niantic
CONNECTICUT PARENT ADVOCACY CENTER (STATEWIDE ADVOCACY AND
SUPPORT)
www.cpacinc.org
860-739-3089, 800-445-2722
Email: cpac@cpacinc.org
Parents and professionals are welcome to visit CPAC; however, consultants
are not available at all times. In order to be sure that there is someone who
can assist you, we suggest that you make an appointment or call ahead.
Georgia
Atlanta
ATLANTA SATELLITE OF CHADD (ADULTS, WOMEN WITH ADHD, AND
PARENT GROUPS)
www.chadd.net/chapter/193
404-502-5358

Email: atlanta-area@chadd.net
Hawaii
Honolulu
LD-ADHD CENTER OF HAWAII
www.ldcenterofhawaii.com
808-955-4775
Email: contact@ldcenterofhawaii.com
Idaho
Boise
IDAHO PARENTS UNLIMITED, INC. (SUPPORT, INFORMATION, AND
ASSISTANCE TO FAMILIES)
www.ipulidaho.org
208-342-5884
Email: parents@ipulidaho.org
Illinois
Chicago
ADHD CENTERS—PETER JAKSA, PH.D.
www.addcenters.com
312-372-4824
Email: drjaksa@addcenters.com
CHICAGO NORTH SHORE ADHD SUPPORT GROUP (CHADD)
www.nsadhd.org
Indiana
Fort Wayne
ALLEN COUNTY CHADD (ADULTS WITH ADHD SUPPORT GROUP)
www.chadd.net/487
260-436-2556

Email: allen-county@chadd.net
Iowa
Des Moines
ASK RESOURCE CENTER (RESOURCE FOR CHILDREN AND ADULTS WITH
DISABILITIES)
www.askresource.org
515-243-1713, 800-450-8667
Email: info@askresource.org
Kansas
FAMILIES TOGETHER, INC. (FAMILY INFORMATION NETWORK)
www.familiestogetherinc.org
Garden City: 620-276-6364; Email: gardencity@familiestogetherinc.org
Topeka: 785-233-4777; Email: topeka@familiestogetherinc.org
Wichita: 316-945-7747; Email wichita@familiestogetherinc.org
Kentucky
NEXT STEP 4 ADHD
www.nextstep4adhd.com
Louisville: 502-907-5908
Lexington: 859-609-0520
Offers access to the highest-quality care and resources coupled with the ease
and convenience of receiving exceptional care for you and your family in one
location.
Louisiana
Metairie
THE CENTER FOR DEVELOPMENT AND LEARNING (CDL)
www.cdl.org
504-840-9786
Email: learn@cdl.org

Lexington: 859-609-0520
Offers access to the highest-quality care and resources coupled with the ease
and convenience of receiving exceptional care for you and your family in one
location.
Louisiana
Metairie
THE CENTER FOR DEVELOPMENT AND LEARNING (CDL)
www.cdl.org
504-840-9786
Email: learn@cdl.org

Provides tools for improving teaching and increasing learning.
New Orleans
FAMILIES HELPING FAMILIES OF SOUTHEAST LOUISIANA
www.fhfsela.org
877-243-7352, 504-943-0343
Provides resources and programming for people with disabilities and their
families.
Maine
Farmingdale
MAINE PARENT FEDERATION
www.mpf.org
207-588-1933, 800-870-7746
Provides advocacy, education, and training.
Maryland
Easton
THE LEARNING CONNECTIONS LLC
www.thelearningconnections.net
Beverly Rohman, Learning Consultant and ADHD Coach
410-829-9561
Email: beverlyrohman@gmail.com
Germantown
CLARKE COACHING
www.clarkecoaching.com
301-956-0900
Email: sherry@ClarkeCoaching.com
Silver Spring and Rockville
ADULT ADHD CENTER OF WASHINGTON
www.adultadhdcenterdc.com

202-232-3766
Email: adultADHDcenter@gmail.com
Psychologists and social workers who specialize in ADHD and also do
general psychotherapy.
Massachusetts
Sudbury
HALLOWELL CENTER BOSTON METROWEST
www.drhallowellsudbury.com
978-287-0819
Michigan
Ann Arbor
WASHTENAW COUNTY CHADD
www.chadd.net/chapter/355
Email: lwoodcock-burroughs@cnld.org
Support groups for adults with ADHD and parents of children with ADHD.
Birmingham
CHADD OF EASTERN OAKLAND COUNTY
www.chadd.net/chapter/527
248-988-6716
Email: eastern-oakland@chadd.net
Grand Rapids
GRAND RAPIDS OF CHADD
www.chaddgr.org
Missouri
St. Peters
MPACT PARENT TRAINING AND INFORMATION
www.missouriparentsact.org

800-743-7634
Email: info@missouriparentsact.org
Montana
Billings
PARENTS, LET’S UNITE FOR KIDS—PLUK (STATEWIDE INFORMATION,
SUPPORT, TRAINING)
www.mtpluk.org
406-255-0540, 800-222-7585
Email: info@mtpluk.org
Nebraska
PTI NEBRASKA (STATEWIDE TRAINING AND INFORMATION FOR FAMILIES
WITH SPECIAL NEEDS)
www.pti-nebraska.org
402-346-0525, 800-284-8520
Email: reception@pti-nebraska.org
Nevada
Las Vegas
NEVADA PEP (EDUCATING AND EMPOWERING FAMILIES)
www.nvpep.org/
702-388-8899, 800-216-5188
Email: pepinfo@nvpep.org
New Jersey
Long Beach
ADD ADULT SUPPORT GROUP (ADULTS AND THEIR SIGNIFICANT OTHERS)
www.drlopresti.com/adhd-support-group
732-842-4553
New York
Manhattan

HALLOWELL CENTER NEW YORK
www.hallowellcenter.org
212-799-7777
Email: info@hallowellcenter.org
MANHATTAN ADULT ADD SUPPORT GROUP
www.maaddsg.org
Contact form on website.
THE ADD RESOURCE CENTER
www.addrc.org
646-295-8080
Nassau County
CHADD OF NASSAU COUNTY
www.chadd.net/chapter/105
516-242-3263
Email: nassau-county@chadd.net
North Carolina
Charlotte
MECKLENBURG COUNTY CHADD
www.chadd.net/chapter/355
Email: lwoodcock-burroughs@cnld.org
Ohio
Central Ohio
CHADD OF COLUMBUS
www.columbuschadd.weebly.com
Email: columbus-ohio@chadd.net
Pennsylvania
Pittsburgh

www.chadd.net/chapter/105
516-242-3263
Email: nassau-county@chadd.net
North Carolina
Charlotte
MECKLENBURG COUNTY CHADD
www.chadd.net/chapter/355
Email: lwoodcock-burroughs@cnld.org
Ohio
Central Ohio
CHADD OF COLUMBUS
www.columbuschadd.weebly.com
Email: columbus-ohio@chadd.net
Pennsylvania
Pittsburgh

CHADD OF PITTSBURGH
www.pittsburghadd.org/
Contact form on website.
Support group for adults with ADHD.
Pittsburgh Area
CHADD #477
www.chadd.net/chapter/477
412-682-6282
Email: lesliestonepgh@gmail.com
Rhode Island
Riverside
LIFESPAN, BRADLEY HOSPITAL
ADHD Adult Support Group
401-782-4286
Email: info@riaddults.org
South Dakota
Sioux Falls
SOUTH DAKOTA PARENT CONNECTION (SDPC)
www.sdparent.org
605-361-3171, 800-640-4553
Email: sdpc@sdparent.org
Connecting families of children with special needs with training, information,
and resources.
Virginia
Virginia Beach
HR CHADD
www.meetup.com/HRCHADD/
Washington

Kirkland
HALLOWELL TODARO ADHD CENTER
www.hallowelltodaro.com
425-999-4227
Email: info@hallowelltodaro.com
Seattle
HALLOWELL TODARO ADHD CENTER
www.hallowelltodaro.com
206-420-7345
Email: info@hallowelltodaro.com
Washington, D.C.
ADVOCATES FOR JUSTICE AND EDUCATION (EDUCATION AND SUPPORT)
www.aje-dc.org
202-678-8060, 888-327-8060
Wyoming
Buffalo
PARENT INFORMATION CENTER (PARENTS HELPING PARENTS OF WYOMING,
INC.)
www.wpic.org
307-684-2277, 800-660-9742
Email: info@wpic.org
Canada
Vancouver, British Columbia
VANCOUVER ADULT ADD SUPPORT GROUP
www.addcoach4u.com/canadianadhdsupportgroups.html
604-263-6993
Email: pete@addcoach4u.com
Meet other adults with ADHD and share support and encouragement.

Select Bibliography
Introduction
Barkley, Russell A., Ph.D. “Reduced Life Expectancy in ADHD.” Interview.
Carlat Child Psychiatry Report, January 2020.

Chapter 1: A Spectrum of Traits
Barkley, Russell A., Ph.D. Taking Charge of ADHD: The Complete,
Authoritative Guide for Parents. 4th ed. New York: Guilford Press, 2020.
(A classic from the man who, more than anyone else, established ADHD
as a real, biologically based, heritable condition.)
———. When an Adult You Love Has ADHD: Professional Advice for
Parents, Partners, and Siblings. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association Press, 2016.
Hedden, T., and J.D.E. Gabrieli. “The Ebb and Flow of Attention in the
Human Brain.” Nature Neuroscience 2006;9 863–65.
https://www.nature.com/articles/nn0706-863.
Jackson, Maggie. Distracted: Reclaiming Our Focus in a World of Lost
Attention. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2018.
Matlen, Terry. The Queen of Distraction: How Women with ADHD Can
Conquer Chaos, Find Focus, and Get More Done. Oakland, CA: New
Harbinger, 2014.
Poole, Jim, M.D., FAAP. Flipping ADHD on Its Head: How to Turn Your
Child’s “Disability” into Their Greatest Strength. Austin, TX: Greenleaf
Book Group Press, 2020.
Solden, Sari, M.S., LMFT. Women with Attention Deficit Disorder. 2nd ed.
Ann Arbor: Introspect Press, 2012.
Spiegelhalter, David. The Art of Statistics: How to Learn from Data. New
York: Basic Books, 2019.
Vail, Priscilla L. Smart Kids with School Problems: Things to Know and Ways
to Help. New York: Plume, 1989. (An all-time classic.)

Solden, Sari, M.S., LMFT. Women with Attention Deficit Disorder. 2nd ed.
Ann Arbor: Introspect Press, 2012.
Spiegelhalter, David. The Art of Statistics: How to Learn from Data. New
York: Basic Books, 2019.
Vail, Priscilla L. Smart Kids with School Problems: Things to Know and Ways
to Help. New York: Plume, 1989. (An all-time classic.)

Chapter 2: Understanding the Demon of the Mind
Boyatzis, R. E., K. Rochford, and A. I. Jack. “Antagonistic Neural Networks
Underlying Differentiated Leadership Roles.” Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience 2014 Mar 4;8:114. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/
10.3389/fnhum.2014.00114/full.
Chai, X. J., N. Ofen, J.D.E. Gabrieli, and S. Whitfield-Gabrieli. “Selective
Development of Anticorrelated Networks in the Intrinsic Functional
Organization of the Human Brain.” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
2014 Mar;26(3):501–13. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23812094/.
———. “Development of Deactivation of the Default-Mode Network During
Episodic Memory Formation.” NeuroImage 2014 Jan 1;84:932–38.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24064072/.
Kumar, J., S. J. Iwabuchi, B. A. Völlm, and L. Palaniyappan. “Oxytocin
Modulates the Effective Connectivity Between the Precuneus and the
Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex.” European Archives of Psychiatry and
Clinical Neuroscience 2019 Feb 7. https://link.springer.com/article/
10.1007/s00406-019-00989-z.
Mattfeld, A. T., J.D.E. Gabrieli, J. Biederman, T. Spencer, A. Brown, A.
Kotte, E. Kagan, and S. Whitfield-Gabrieli. “Brain Differences Between
Persistent and Remitted Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.” Brain
2014 Sep;137(Pt 9):2423–28. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
24916335/.
Raichle, Marcus. “The Brain’s Default Mode Network.” Annual Review of
Neuroscience 2015 July;38:433–47. https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/
10.1146/annurev-neuro-071013-014030.
Tryon, Warren. Cognitive Neuroscience and Psychology: Network Principles
for a Unified Theory. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press, 2014.

Chapter 3: The Cerebellum Connection
Chevalier, N., V. Parent, M. Rouillard, F. Simard, M. C. Guay, and
C. Verret. “The Impact of a Motor-Cognitive Remediation Program on
Attentional Functions of Preschoolers with ADHD Symptoms.” Journal
of Attention Disorders 2017 Nov;21(13):1121–29.
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1087054712468485.
Guell, X., J.D.E. Gabrieli, and J. D. Schmahmann. “Embodied Cognition and
the Cerebellum: Perspectives from the Dysmetria of Thought and the
Universal Cerebellar Transform Theories.” Cortex 2018 Mar; 100:140–
48. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28779872/.
Schmahmann, Jeremy D. “The Cerebellum and Cognition.” Neuroscience
Letters 2019 Jan 1;688:62–75. https://neuro.psychiatryonline.org/doi/full/
10.1176/jnp.16.3.367.
———. “Disorders of the Cerebellum: Ataxia, Dysmetria of Thought, and
the Cerebellar Cognitive Affective Syndrome.” Journal of
Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences 2004;16(3):367–78.
https://neuro.psychiatryonline.org/doi/full/10.1176/jnp.16.3.367.
———, J. B. Weilburg, and J. C. Sherman. “The Neuropsychiatry of the
Cerebellum—Insights from the Clinic.” Cerebellum 2007;6(3):254–67.
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1080%2F14734220701490995.

Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences 2004;16(3):367–78.
https://neuro.psychiatryonline.org/doi/full/10.1176/jnp.16.3.367.
———, J. B. Weilburg, and J. C. Sherman. “The Neuropsychiatry of the
Cerebellum—Insights from the Clinic.” Cerebellum 2007;6(3):254–67.
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1080%2F14734220701490995.

Chapter 4: The Healing Power of Connection
The Adverse Childhood Experiences Study. https://acestoohigh.com/2012/10/
03/the-adverse-childhood-experiences-study-the-largest-most-important-
public-health-study-you-never-heard-of-began-in-an-obesity-clinic/.
Christakis, Nicholas A., M.D., Ph.D., and James H. Fowler, Ph.D.
Connected: How Your Friends’ Friends’ Friends Affect Everything You Feel,
Think, and Do. Boston: Little, Brown, 2009.
Harding, Kelli. The Rabbit Effect: Live Longer, Healthier, and Happier with
the Groundbreaking Science of Kindness. New York: Atria Books, 2019.
“How Family Dinners Improve Students’ Grades.”
https://www.ectutoring.com/resources/articles/family-dinners-improve-
students-grades.
Kumar, J., S. J. Iwabuchi, B. A. Völlm, and L. Palaniyappan. “Oxytocin
Modulates the Effective Connectivity Between the Precuneus and the
Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex.” European Archives of Psychiatry and
Clinical Neuroscience 2019 Feb 7. https://link.springer.com/article/
10.1007/s00406-019-00989-z.
Lieberman, Matthew D. Social: Why Our Brains Are Wired to Connect. New
York: Broadway Books, 2014.
Murthy, Vivek H., M.D. Together: The Healing Power of Connection in a
Sometimes Lonely World. New York: Harper Wave, 2020.
Rowe, John Wallis, M.D., and Robert L. Kahn, Ph.D. Successful Aging. New
York: Pantheon, 1998.
Vaillant, George. Triumphs of Experience: The Men of the Harvard Grant
Study. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2015.

Chapter 5: Find Your Right Difficult
Bloom, Benjamin S. Developing Talent in Young People. New York:
Ballantine, 1985. (A classic.)
Brooks, David. The Road to Character. New York: Random House, 2015.
Hallowell, Edward M., M.D. Shine: Using Brain Science to Get the Best from
Your People. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Review Press, 2011.
Kolbe, Kathy. Conative Connection: Uncovering the Link Between Who You
Are and How You Perform. Phoenix, AZ: Kolbe Corporation, 1997.

Chapter 6: Create Stellar Environments
Campbell, T. Colin, and Thomas M. Campbell II. The China Study: Revised
and Expanded Edition: The Most Comprehensive Study of Nutrition Ever
Conducted and the Startling Implications for Diet, Weight Loss, and Long-
Term Health. Dallas, TX: BenBella Books, 2016.
Frates, Beth, M.D., et al. The Lifestyle Medicine Handbook: An Introduction
to the Power of Healthy Habits. Monterey, CA: Healthy Learning, 2018.
Maguire, Caroline, PCC, M.Ed. Why Will No One Play with Me? The Play
Better Plan to Help Children of All Ages Make Friends and Thrive. New
York: Grand Central Publishing, 2019.
Vaillant, George E., M.D. Aging Well: Surprising Guideposts to a Happier Life
from the Landmark Harvard Study of Adult Development. Boston: Little,
Brown, 2003.

Maguire, Caroline, PCC, M.Ed. Why Will No One Play with Me? The Play
Better Plan to Help Children of All Ages Make Friends and Thrive. New
York: Grand Central Publishing, 2019.
Vaillant, George E., M.D. Aging Well: Surprising Guideposts to a Happier Life
from the Landmark Harvard Study of Adult Development. Boston: Little,
Brown, 2003.

Chapter 7: Move to Focus, Move to Motivate: The Power of Exercise
Brewer, J. A., P. D. Worhunsky, J. R. Gray, Y. Y. Tang, J. Weber, and H.
Kober. “Meditation Experience Is Associated with Differences in Default
Mode Network Activity and Connectivity.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2011 Dec
13;108(50):20254–59. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22114193/.
Chevalier, N., V. Parent, M. Rouillard, F. Simard, M. C. Guay, and
C. Verret. “The Impact of a Motor-Cognitive Remediation Program on
Attentional Functions of Preschoolers with ADHD Symptoms.” Journal
of Attention Disorders 2017 Nov;21(13):1121–29.
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1087054712468485.
Chou, C. C., and C. J. Huang. “Effects of an 8-Week Yoga Program on
Sustained Attention and Discrimination Function in Children with
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder.” PeerJ 2017 Jan 12;5:e2883.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28097075/.
Hölzel, B. K., J. Carmody, M. Vangel, C. Congleton, S. M. Yerramsetti, T.
Gard, and S. W. Lazar. “Mindfulness Practice Leads to Increases in
Regional Brain Gray Matter Density.” Psychiatry Research 2011
Jan 30;191(1):36–43. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21071182/.
Levin, K. “The Dance of Attention: Toward an Aesthetic Dimension of
Attention-Deficit.” Integrative Psychological and Behavioral Science 2018
Mar;52(1):129–51. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs12124-
017-9413-7.
Mailey, E. L., D. Dlugonski, W. W. Hsu, and M. Segar. “Goals Matter:
Exercising for Well-Being but Not Health or Appearance Predicts Future
Exercise Among Parents.” Journal of Physical Activity and Health 2018
Nov 1;15(11):857–65. https://journals.humankinetics.com/view/journals/
jpah/15/11/article-p857.xml.
Ratey, John J., M.D., and Eric Hagerman. Spark: The Revolutionary New
Science of Exercise and the Brain. Boston: Little, Brown, 2008.
Suarez-Manzano, S., A. Ruiz-Ariza, M. De la Torre-Cruz, and E. J.
Martínez-López. “Acute and Chronic Effect of Physical Activity on
Cognition and Behaviour in Young People with ADHD: A Systematic

Review of Intervention Studies.” Research in Developmental Disabilities
2018 Jun;77:12–23. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29625261/.

Chapter 8: Medication: The Most Powerful Tool Everyone Fears
Alexander, Bruce K. The Globalization of Addiction: A Study in Poverty of
the Spirit. New York: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Biederman, J., M. C. Monuteaux, T. Spencer, T. E. Wilens, H. A.
Macpherson, and S. V. Faraone. “Stimulant Therapy and Risk for
Subsequent Substance Use Disorders in Male Adults with ADHD: A
Naturalistic Controlled 10-Year Follow-Up Study.” American Journal of
Psychiatry 2008;165:597–603. https://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/doi/
10.1176/appi.ajp.2007.07091486.
Cortese, S., et al. “Comparative Efficacy and Tolerability of Medications for
Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in Children, Adolescents, and
Adults: A Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analysis.” Psychiatry
2018 Sep;5(9):727–38. https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/
article/PIIS2215-0366(18)30269-4/fulltext.

Cortese, S., et al. “Comparative Efficacy and Tolerability of Medications for
Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in Children, Adolescents, and
Adults: A Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analysis.” Psychiatry
2018 Sep;5(9):727–38. https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/
article/PIIS2215-0366(18)30269-4/fulltext.
Fay, T. B., and M. A. Alpert. “Cardiovascular Effects of Drugs Used to Treat
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Part 2: Impact on
Cardiovascular Events and Recommendations for Evaluation and
Monitoring.” Cardiology in Review 2019 Jul/Aug;27(4):173–78.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30531411/.
Foote, Jeffrey, Ph.D., Carrie Wilkens, Ph.D., and Nicole Kosanke, Ph.D.
Beyond Addiction: How Science and Kindness Help People. New York:
Scribner, 2014.
Kolar, D., A. Keller, M. Golfinopoulos, L. Cumyn, C. Syer, and
L. Hechtman. “Treatment of Adults with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder.” Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment 2008 Feb;4(1):107–
21. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18728745/.
Pollan, Michael. How to Change Your Mind. New York: Penguin Press, 2018.
Sederer, Lloyd. The Addiction Solution. New York: Scribner, 2019.
Shaw, M., P. Hodgkins, H. Caci, S. Young, J. Kahle, A. G. Woods, and L. E.
Arnold. “A Systematic Review and Analysis of Long-Term Outcomes in
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: Effects of Treatment and Non-
Treatment.” BMC Medicine 2012 Sep 4;10:99.
https://bmcmedicine.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1741-7015-10-
99.

Szalavitz, Maia. Unbroken Brain: A Revolutionary New Way of
Understanding Addiction. New York: Picador, 2017.
Westbrook, A., R. van den Bosch, J. I. Määttä, L. Hofmans,
D. Papadopetraki, R. Cools, and M. J. Frank. “Dopamine Promotes
Cognitive Effort by Biasing the Benefits Versus Costs of Cognitive
Work.” Science 2020 Mar 20;367(6484):1362–66.
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/367/6484/1362.
Wilens, Timothy E., M.D. Straight Talk About Psychiatric Medications for
Kids. 4th ed. New York: Guilford Press, 2016.

Also by Edward M. Hallowell, M.D., and John J. Ratey, M.D.
Driven to Distraction: Recognizing and Coping with Attention Deficit Disorder from Childhood
Through Adulthood
Answers to Distraction
Delivered from Distraction: Getting the Most out of Life with Attention Deficit Disorder
Also by Edward M. Hallowell, M.D.
What Are You Worth? (with William Grace)
Finding the Heart of the Child: Essays on Children, Families, and School (with Michael
Thompson)
When You Worry About the Child You Love: Emotional and Learning Problems in Children
Worry: Hope and Help for a Common Condition
Connect: 12 Vital Ties That Open Your Heart, Lengthen Your Life, and Deepen Your Soul
Human Moments: How to Find Meaning and Love in Your Everyday Life
Dare to Forgive
The Childhood Roots of Adult Happiness: Five Steps to Help Kids Create and Sustain Lifelong
Joy
A Walk in the Rain with a Brain (for children)
Positively ADD (with Catherine Corman)
CrazyBusy: Overstretched, Overbooked, and About to Snap!
Superparenting for ADD: An Innovative Approach to Raising Your Distracted Child (with
Peter Jensen)
Married to Distraction: How to Restore Intimacy and Strengthen Your Partnership in an Age of
Interruption (with Sue Hallowell)
Because I Come from a Crazy Family: The Making of a Psychiatrist
Shine: Using Brain Science to Get the Best from Your People
Driven to Distraction at Work: How to Focus and Be More Productive

Married to Distraction: How to Restore Intimacy and Strengthen Your Partnership in an Age of
Interruption (with Sue Hallowell)
Because I Come from a Crazy Family: The Making of a Psychiatrist
Shine: Using Brain Science to Get the Best from Your People
Driven to Distraction at Work: How to Focus and Be More Productive
Also by John J. Ratey, M.D.
Spark: The Revolutionary New Science of Exercise and the Brain (with Eric Hagerman)

Go Wild: Eat Fat, Run Free, Be Social, and Follow Evolution’s Other Rules for Total Health
and Well-Being (with Richard Manning)
A User’s Guide to the Brain: Perception, Attention, and the Four Theaters of the Brain
Shadow Syndromes: The Mild Forms of Major Mental Disorders That Sabotage Us (with
Catherine Johnson, Ph.D.)
Spark for Children: How to Raise IQ, EQ, and PQ (in Mandarin)
Spark for Chinese Children
Mental Retardation: Developing Pharmacotherapies (ed.)
The Neuropsychiatry of Personality Disorders (ed.)

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Edward M. Hallowell, M.D., is a board-certified child and adult psychiatrist, a
world-renowned keynote speaker, and the New York Times bestselling author
or co-author of more than twenty books, including Driven to Distraction (with
John J. Ratey), which sparked a revolution in our understanding of ADHD. A
graduate of Harvard College and Tulane Medical School, Dr. Hallowell was a
Harvard Medical School faculty member for twenty-one years. He and his
work have been featured on 20/20, 60 Minutes, Oprah, PBS, CNN, Today,
Dateline, Good Morning America, and The View and in The New York Times,
USA Today, Newsweek, Time, U.S. News & World Report, the Los Angeles
Times, and the Boston Globe. A regular columnist for ADDitude magazine, he
is also the host of the weekly podcast Distraction. He is the founder of the
Hallowell Centers in Boston MetroWest, New York City, San Francisco,
Seattle, and Palo Alto. He lives in the Boston area with his wife, where they
welcome their three grown children whenever they visit and await a
grandchild, second parent and birth date to be determined.
John J. Ratey, M.D., is an associate clinical professor of psychiatry at
Harvard Medical School and an internationally recognized expert in
neuropsychiatry and wellness. He has published more than sixty peer-
reviewed articles and eleven books, including the groundbreaking
ADD/ADHD Driven to Distraction series with Edward M. Hallowell, M.D.,
and Spark: The Revolutionary New Science of Exercise and the Brain, which
established him as one of the world’s foremost authorities on the brain-fitness
connection. Recognized by his peers as one of the Best Doctors in America
since 1997, Dr. Ratey has been honored by the Massachusetts Psychiatric
Society as Outstanding Psychiatrist of the Year for advancing the field. Dr.
Ratey and his work are frequently profiled in the media; he has been featured
on ABC, CBS, NBC, PBS, and NPR, as well as in The New York Times,
Newsweek, The Washington Post, U.S. News & World Report, and Men’s
Health, among other publications. Dr. Ratey and his wife, Alicia, divide their
