ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Edward M. Hallowell, M.D., is in private practice in
adult and child psychiatry and has offices in both the
Boston area and New York City. He lives with his wife,
Sue, and children, Lucy, Jack, and Tucker.
www.drhallowell.com
John J. Ratey, M.D., is a Clinical Associate Professor of
Psychiatry at Harvard Medical School and is in private
practice. He lives in the Boston area.
www.johnratey.com

ALSO BY
EDWARD M. HALLOWELL, M.D.,
AND JOHN J. RATEY, M.D.
Answers to Distraction
Delivered from Distraction
ALSO BY
EDWARD M. HALLOWELL, M.D.
The Childhood Roots of Adult Happiness:
Five Steps to Help Kids Sustain and Create Lifelong Joy
CrazyBusy:
Overstretched, Overbooked, and About to Snap!
Strategies for Handling Your Fast-Paced Life
Connect:
12 Vital Ties That Open Your Heart,
Lengthen Your Life, and Deepen Your Soul
Dare to Forgive:
The Power of Letting Go and Moving On
Finding the Heart of the Child:
Essays on Children, Families, and Schools
 (with Michael Thompson)
Human Moments:
How to Find Meaning and Love in Your Everyday Life
Married to Distraction:
Restoring Intimacy and Strengthening Your Marriage
in an Age of Interruption
 (with Sue George Hallowell, LICSW,
and Melissa Orlev)

Positively ADD:
Real Success Stories to Inspire Your Dreams
 (with Catherine Corman)
Shine:
Using Brain Science to Get the Best from People
Superparenting for ADD:
An Innovative Approach to Raising Your Distracted Child
 (with Peter S. Jensen)
A Walk in the Rain with a Brain
What Are You Worth?
 (with William J. Grace, Jr.)
When You Worry About the Child You Love:
A Reassuring Guide to Solving Your Child’s
Emotional and Learning Problems
Worry:
Hope and Help for a Common Condition
ALSO BY
JOHN J. RATEY, M.D.
The Neuropsychiatry of Personality Disorders
Shadow Syndromes
 (with Catherine Johnson)
Spark:
The Revolutionary New Science of Exercise and the Brain
 (with Eric Hagerman)

A User’s Guide to the Brain:
Perception, Attention, and the Four Theaters of the Brain



FIRST ANCHOR BOOKS EDITION, SEPTEMBER 2011
Copyright © 1994, 2011 by Edward M. Hallowell, M.D.,
and John J. Ratey, M.D.
All rights reserved. Published in the United States by
Anchor Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New York,
and in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto.
Originally published in hardcover in slightly different form
by Pantheon Books, a division of Random House, Inc.,
New York, in 1994, and subsequently published in paperback by
Touchstone, a division of Simon & Schuster Inc.,
in New York, in 1995.
Anchor Books and colophon are registered trademarks
of Random House, Inc.
Grateful acknowledgment is made to Frank Wolkenberg
and The New York Times for permission to reprint excerpts from
“Out of the Darkness,” October 1987. Copyright © 1987 by
Frank Wolkenberg. Reprinted by permission.
Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available on file at the
Library of Congress.
eISBN: 978-0-307-74316-9
www.anchorbooks.com
v3.1

Grateful acknowledgment is made to Frank Wolkenberg
and The New York Times for permission to reprint excerpts from
“Out of the Darkness,” October 1987. Copyright © 1987 by
Frank Wolkenberg. Reprinted by permission.
Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available on file at the
Library of Congress.
eISBN: 978-0-307-74316-9
www.anchorbooks.com
v3.1

DEDICATION
We gratefully dedicate this book to seven teachers of ours, seven
psychiatrists who shared with each other a liveliness of mind, an
independence of thought, a love of the work, and an appreciation of
play.
They taught us to listen and to see.
Doris Mezer Benaron, Jules Bemporad, William Beuscher, Thomas
Gutheil, Leston Havens, Allan Hobson, and Irvin Taube all gave of
themselves much more than this small dedication can acknowledge.
During their years of teaching at the Massachusetts Mental Health
Center in Boston, they taught us to be humble in our work. They
taught us to go where the patient is and to sit down and listen. They
taught us to connect with the patient, person-to-person. They taught
us to look for the heart of the patient, to look for the sorrow and for
the joy. We thank them from our own hearts.

CONTENTS
Cover
About the Authors
Other Books by This Author
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
INTRODUCTION TO THE ANCHOR EDITION
by Edward M. Hallowell
1. What Is Attention Deficit Disorder?
2. “I Sang in My Chains Like the Sea”
 THE CHILD WITH ADD
3. “Sequence Ravelled Out of Sound”
 ADULT ADD
4. Living and Loving with ADD
 ADD IN COUPLES
5. The Big Struggle
 ADD AND THE FAMILY
6. Parts of the Elephant
 SUBTYPES OF ADD
7. How Do I Know if I Have It?
 THE STEPS TOWARD DIAGNOSIS

8. What Can You Do About It?
 THE TREATMENT OF ADD
9. A Local Habitation and a Name
 THE BIOLOGY OF ADD
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
APPENDIX
Where to Find Help

INTRODUCTION
TO THE ANCHOR EDITION
Leading up to the publication of the first edition of Driven to
Distraction in 1994, I remember a conversation I had with Jonathan
Galassi, now the man in charge of the New York publishing house
Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Friends since high school and college, Jon
and I confide in each other on just about everything. As an editor,
Jon had concerns about this new book I was about to send out into
the world. “No one’s heard of attention deficit disorder, and from the
title I’m worried people will think it’s a book about cars.” Nearly two
million in sales later, Jon and I still chuckle on the fallibility of even
the most perspicacious of editors.
Back in 1994, few people had even heard of ADD, as it was then
called (now it’s ADHD, soon to change again, no doubt!). Those few
who had heard of it didn’t really know what it meant. It conjured up
stereotypical images of hyperactive little boys disrupting classrooms
and turning life at home into chaos. It was considered to be a
condition found exclusively in children, almost all of whom were
male. It was thought that children “grew out of” ADD, so that it
disappeared by adulthood. Only a rare few doctors knew that ADD
could continue on in adults and that females could have it as easily as
males.
I learned about ADD in 1981, the first year of my fellowship in
child psychiatry at the Massachusetts Mental Health Center in
Boston. Before then, if you’d told me a person had attention deficit
disorder, I would have thought it was some psychoanalytic concept
that referred to children who didn’t get enough attention. But then

I learned about ADD in 1981, the first year of my fellowship in
child psychiatry at the Massachusetts Mental Health Center in
Boston. Before then, if you’d told me a person had attention deficit
disorder, I would have thought it was some psychoanalytic concept
that referred to children who didn’t get enough attention. But then
one of my teachers, Dr. Elsie Freeman, gave us a lecture on ADD.
That lecture changed my life forever. As I listened to Elsie speak,
my jaw dropped. I had the greatest “Aha!” experience of my life. Elsie
was describing me. At last I found an explanation for the different

ways I thought and behaved. I’d always excelled in school and
college, so no one, including me, thought I had a learning disability. I
knew I was a slow reader—and I have since pieced together that in
addition to ADD I also have dyslexia—but I never had understood
why I came up with different ways of solving problems, why I had an
intuitive approach to so much, why I tended to think outside the box,
why I could be so impatient so often, why I was so quick to draw
conclusions, why I had an oddball sense of humor, and on and on.
Although I am not what I now understand to be the classic version of
a person who has ADD, I do have the condition for sure.
More important, back in 1981, I realized that many more people
had this condition than experts realized. I also knew it extended into
adulthood. ADD became my subspecialty; I began to read papers
about it and look for it in my patients.
I also began a dialogue that continues to this day with my friend
John Ratey. I met John in 1979, when I was a first-year resident at
Mass. Mental, as it was called, a state hospital that was also a
Harvard teaching hospital. John was my chief resident, part mentor,
part friend, for that year. When I finished residency and started my
training in child psychiatry, John and I remained in touch, meeting
once a week to play squash and discuss what interested us. ADD
became one of our lead topics.
All through the 1980s and into the 1990s, John and I explored the
topic, comparing notes on patients, speculating on what more went
into ADD than was in the books. John also realized that he had ADD,
so we made quite the logical pair to look into it in depth.
There were no good books on the subject written for the general
public at that time, so I began to write handouts to give to my
patients. I’d stack them up on the floor of my office. After I’d written
about twenty such handouts it occurred to me that I ought to write a
book. More and more patients—of all ages—were seeking help for

ADD. Rather than reach only the few who found their way to my
door, I wanted to write a book that could reach many more people.
John encouraged me to do it. We brainstormed. Then I wrote a
proposal, which was accepted. I was surprised that it was accepted by
a trade book publisher, because the topic was unknown to the
general public. This was not a diet book, a cookbook, or even a book
on a common condition like diabetes or arthritis. It was a book about
a condition most people had never heard of.
As I worked on the book, I’d call John Ratey now and then to let
him know how it was going. He would give me encouragement when
I’d inevitably ask, “Will anyone read this book?” And he’d listen as
I’d read him a paragraph or two, and give feedback. But it was my
wife, Sue, who had to listen to most of the book. Poor Sue! She had

As I worked on the book, I’d call John Ratey now and then to let
him know how it was going. He would give me encouragement when
I’d inevitably ask, “Will anyone read this book?” And he’d listen as
I’d read him a paragraph or two, and give feedback. But it was my
wife, Sue, who had to listen to most of the book. Poor Sue! She had
the impossible task of giving useful criticism but also saying she
loved the book. I’d get annoyed at her every criticism, but I was
smart enough to take every single one of them and make changes in
the book.
When the book came out, it sold briskly at first, because the ADD
community had got word of it in advance. I figured we’d have a quick
burst of sales, then it would settle into its obsolescence.
That didn’t happen.
Much as Elsie Freeman hit a nerve when she lectured about ADD
to me, Driven to Distraction hit a nerve in the general public. People
were ready to understand the symptoms of ADD not as moral failings
or evidence of “badness” or “lack of discipline,” but as a neurological
condition not under the control of individual will.
For some people, this was, and still is, heresy. The old moral model
dies hard. It still lives on in the minds of certain groups and
individuals. At the heart of the moral model beats the conviction that
willpower controls all human emotion, learning, and behavior.
Under this model, the cure for depression is to cheer up. The cure for

anxiety is to suck it up. And the cure for ADD is to try harder. While
trying harder helps just about everything, telling someone with ADD
to try harder is no more helpful than telling someone who is
nearsighted to squint harder. It missed the biological point.
But in 1994, with the moral model still shaping the public’s views
on ADD, many people attacked me for arguing that ADD derived
from genes and biology, not from bad parenting and weak character.
I remember being on National Public Radio in the 1990s with a
psychiatrist by the name of Peter Breggin. The show originated in
NPR’s Boston studio. For an hour, Dr. Breggin harangued
vituperatively. He attacked ADD as a bogus diagnosis concocted by
the pharmaceutical industry and supported by irresponsible parents
who wanted to excuse their children’s poor behavior rather than step
up and learn how to be good parents. I did my best to offer the
science that proved my point of view to be correct—that ADD is a
valid diagnosis, that its etiology is primarily genetic, and that while
good parenting will help any child and bad parenting harm any child,
bad parenting certainly does not cause ADD.
At one point I remember asking Dr. Breggin, “Just to be clear, are
you telling us that there is no such thing as true ADD, and that every
case of what is diagnosed now as ADD is in fact simply bad behavior
caused by bad parenting?”
For once, Dr. Breggin had a short reply. “Yes,” he said.
When the show was over, we both walked out into the lobby of the
NPR station. Dr. Breggin asked where his limo was to take him to the
airport. He was told that limos for guests are not in the budget of
NPR. Dr. Breggin got upset, and repeated his request for a limo, this
time quite emphatically. Rather than watch what was to happen next,
I stepped in and volunteered to take Dr. Breggin to Logan myself.
Since I live in the Boston area, I had my car outside. On the ride to
the airport, Dr. Breggin and I had a genuinely pleasant conversation.

NPR. Dr. Breggin got upset, and repeated his request for a limo, this
time quite emphatically. Rather than watch what was to happen next,
I stepped in and volunteered to take Dr. Breggin to Logan myself.
Since I live in the Boston area, I had my car outside. On the ride to
the airport, Dr. Breggin and I had a genuinely pleasant conversation.

I realized that he was a good man, simply defending what he thought
was right.
Many people back then agreed with him. Fortunately, however,
science intervened. The 1990s was the decade of the brain. Science
uncovered more and more evidence, from imaging studies to genetic
studies to family studies, proving that ADD was a true biological
entity. Furthermore, ongoing studies proved that, if undiagnosed and
untreated, ADD can cause severe impairment. In other words, it was
crucial to make this diagnosis and do something about it.
In discussing what’s happened over the past decade and a half with
Dr. Russell Barkley, one of the leading researchers in the field, I was
particularly interested in Dr. Barkley’s comment that ADD is more
impairing than any syndrome in all mental health that is treated on
an outpatient basis. More impairing than anxiety, more impairing
than depression, more impairing than substance abuse. The
“morbidity” of untreated ADD is profound. Twenty-five percent of
the prison population has undiagnosed ADD. Most of the kids in the
juvenile justice system have untreated ADD. Traffic accidents are
eight times more common than in the general population. If you
have ADD, you are 40 percent more likely to get divorced than if you
don’t, and 30 percent more likely to be unemployed. Estimates run
as high as 40 percent of the addicted population having ADD, and a
significant proportion of the eating-disordered population.
In other words, untreated, ADD can be a disaster.
I also asked Dr. Barkley what he sees as the leading developments
in the field in the past fifteen years, beyond identifying the scope of
the problem. He named the identification of ADD in adults as one
leading issue. Here again, the need for education is paramount; 90
percent of adults who have the condition don’t know it! If they did
know it, they could transform their lives from lives of struggle,
underachievement, and turmoil to lives of joy, fulfillment, and
success. Regardless of whether the person is a child as young as five

or an adult as old as eighty-five, the diagnosis of ADD can change a
life dramatically for the better. As impairing as ADD can be if
untreated, it can be hugely gratifying to get it treated.
This is where my work has focused since Driven to Distraction
first came out. I am a clinician—someone who sees patients on a
regular basis—as well as an educator and a writer. It has been my
mission to bring the good news of how profoundly a diagnosis and
treatment of ADD can help individuals, couples, families, businesses,
and other organizations.
Now that most people in the general public have heard of ADD—or
ADHD—we need to help them understand what it is, what treatment
is all about, how commonly it occurs in adults, how medication alone
is not sufficient treatment, and how many positive attributes can
emerge once treatment begins.
I routinely see people surge from lives of struggle to lives of
success once they get treatment for their ADHD. I see the positive
attributes emerge and take over, attributes like creativity, originality,

is not sufficient treatment, and how many positive attributes can
emerge once treatment begins.
I routinely see people surge from lives of struggle to lives of
success once they get treatment for their ADHD. I see the positive
attributes emerge and take over, attributes like creativity, originality,
the ability to think outside the box, tenacity and grit, bigheartedness, entrepreneurialism, and humor. I see careers turn
around and marriages saved. I see children go from failing in fourth
grade to top of the class in fifth. I see children change from nervous,
misunderstood underachievers to proud and confident leaders of the
class.
That’s why the biggest change I’ve seen in the past fifteen years is
not the biggest change most experts have seen or the world at large
knows about. Most people now acknowledge—and see all too well—
the damage that ADHD can do, the impairment it causes, the school
experiences it ruins, the careers it sabotages, the marriages it breaks
up.
I see all that, too. But I see the progress, perhaps more clearly than
anyone because I treat so many people of so many ages. I see the

triumphs, the successes, the dreams-come-true.
I also see how essential a comprehensive treatment plan is, a plan
that incorporates education, understanding, empathy, structure,
coaching, a plan for success and physical exercise as well as
medication. I see how important the human connection is every step
of the way: connection with parent or spouse; with teacher or
supervisor; with friend or colleague; with doctor, with therapist, with
coach, with the world “out there.” In fact, I see the human
connection as the single most powerful therapeutic force in the
treatment of ADHD.
Led by Peter Jensen, M.D., the Multimodal Treatment Assessment
(MTA) study bears this out. The largest study done on the treatment
of ADHD, the MTA study first identified the primary importance of
medication in treating ADHD. But follow-up shows that the children
who do best are the children who have positive human connections
in their lives.
We in psychiatry have been falling in love with our somatic
treatments, especially medication, over the years since this book was
first published. And rightly so! Medications have changed the face of
the treatment of all mental conditions for the better. But, we must
not forget the primary importance of the human connection.
Put differently, love works. Positive human relationships work.
The human connection is indispensable. I call it “the other Vitamin
C,” Vitamin Connect. And if you do not get enough of it, you will
languish and never thrive.
With the release of this new edition of Driven to Distraction, John
Ratey and I revel in the many new developments that have blessed
the field. John himself has pioneered the emphasis on physical
exercise not only as a superb treatment for ADHD, but as a brain
booster in general. We have also learned much more about ADHD in
adults, about effective ways of educating the general public, as well

Ratey and I revel in the many new developments that have blessed
the field. John himself has pioneered the emphasis on physical
exercise not only as a superb treatment for ADHD, but as a brain
booster in general. We have also learned much more about ADHD in
adults, about effective ways of educating the general public, as well

as physicians; we have seen the development of new excellent
medications, as well as new diagnostic tools (the history remains the
best diagnostic tool, however).
Now is the time to use all that we’ve learned to shine the light of
knowledge into the dank, dark dungeons of ignorance and stigma
that still retard progress in mental health and cause millions of
people to suffer unnecessarily. Nowhere does the use of knowledge
lag further behind the knowledge we have than in mental health.
That must end. Now. Now is the time to cast fear aside, now is the
time to put an end to the shame individuals and families often feel
when they seek help in the field of mental health. Using ADHD as a
prime example, now is the time to show the world how many of its
champions, its innovators, its titans, its benefactors and
contributors, its leaders in every field have ADHD, or some other
mental difference.
Now is the time to tell the whole truth, that embedded in what can
be so problematic we can find strength. Embedded in the mind of
each person who has ADHD, or depression, or bipolar disorder, or an
anxiety disorder, one can find talents and strengths. It is upon those
talents and strengths that the most successful treatment is built. Now
is the time to blow the lid off the model that merely identifies
pathology and to replace it with the more accurate—and hopeful—
model that not only acknowledges the problems but also seeks and
identifies the strengths as well.
In explaining ADD, this book relies heavily upon examples drawn
from life. Some of the accounts are composites, some are drawn
directly from our patients’ experience, and some are based upon
interviews conducted for this book. In all cases the names are
fictitious.
Again, we would like to thank the many individuals who shared
their experience so that this book could be possible. We hope that
since its publication, Driven to Distraction has dealt severe body

blows to the Goliath of ignorance and stigma. Now let us all pick up
our pebbles, aim carefully, and fell this Goliath once and for all.

1

WHAT IS
ATTENTION DEFICIT DISORDER?
Once you catch on to what this syndrome is all about, you’ll see it
everywhere. People you used to think of as disorganized or manic or
hyper or creative but unpredictable, people who you know could do
more if they could just “get it together,” people who have bounced
around in school or in their professional lives, people who have made
it to the top but who still feel driven or disorganized, these may be
people who in fact have attention deficit disorder. You may even
recognize some of the symptoms in your own behavior. Many of the
symptoms of ADD are so common to us all that for the term ADD to
have specific meaning, rather than just be a scientific-sounding label
for the complex lives we lead, we need to define the syndrome
carefully. The best way to understand what ADD is—and what it is
not—is to see how it affects the lives of people who have it.
In the cases that follow, and in the many case illustrations that
appear in this book, one can witness the struggles individuals faced
to break through inaccurate labels and unfair judgments. As their
stories unfold, a definition of ADD emerges.

Case 1: Jim
It was eleven o’clock at night and Jim Finnegan was up pacing in his
study. This was where he often found himself at night: alone, pacing,
trying to get things together. Now approaching the halfway point of
life, Jim was getting desperate. He looked around the room and took
in the disorder. The room looked as if the contents of a bag lady’s
shopping cart had been dumped into it. Books, papers, odd socks, old
letters, a few half-smoked packages of Marlboros, and other loose
ends lay scattered about, much like the bits and pieces of cognition
that were strewn about in his mind.
Jim looked up at the TO DO list that was tacked to the cork-board
above his desk. There were seventeen items, the final one circled
several times in black ink and marked with exclamation points:
“Reorganization proposal due Tues., 3/19!!!” This was Mon., 3/18.
Jim hadn’t started on the proposal. He’d been thinking about it for
weeks, ever since he told his boss that he had a plan that would
increase productivity, as well as morale, in the office. His boss had
said fine, come up with a written proposal and we’ll see how it looks.
His boss had also added a remark about how he hoped Jim would
have enough “follow-through” to actually get something done this
time.
Jim knew what he wanted to say. He’d known for months what he
wanted to say. The office needed a new computer system, and the
men and women out front needed more authority so they could make
decisions on the spot so everybody’s time wouldn’t be wasted in
unnecessary meetings. Efficiency would go up and morale would
definitely improve. It was simple. Obvious. All the ideas were
detailed on the various scraps of paper that dotted the floor of his
room.
But all Jim could do was pace. Where do I start? he thought to
himself. If it doesn’t come out right, I’ll look stupid, probably get
fired. So what else is new? Why should this job be any different?
Great ideas, no follow-through. That’s me, good old Jim. He kicked

detailed on the various scraps of paper that dotted the floor of his
room.
But all Jim could do was pace. Where do I start? he thought to
himself. If it doesn’t come out right, I’ll look stupid, probably get
fired. So what else is new? Why should this job be any different?
Great ideas, no follow-through. That’s me, good old Jim. He kicked

the trash basket and added to the mess on the floor. OK, breathe in,
breathe out, he told himself.
He sat down at his word processor and stared at the screen. Then
he went over to his desk and began to straighten things up. The
telephone rang and he barked at it, “Can’t you see I’m busy?” When
the answering machine came on, he heard Pauline’s voice: “Jim, I’m
going to sleep now. I just wanted to see how your proposal is coming.
Good luck with it tomorrow.” He didn’t have the heart to pick up the
phone.
The night went on agonizingly. One minor distraction after
another would knock Jim off-line as he tried to clutch onto the task
at hand. A cat would meow outside. He’d think of something
someone had said three days ago and wonder what they really meant
by that. He’d want a new pencil because the one he had felt heavy in
his hand. Finally, he got down the words “A Proposal for Office
Reorganization at Unger Laboratories.” Then nothing. “Just say what
you want to say,” a friend had told him. OK, say what you want to
say. But nothing came. He thought of a new job he wanted to apply
for. Maybe I should just bag this and go to bed. Can’t do that. No
matter how bad it is, I’ve got to finish this proposal.
By 4 A.M. he was beat. But not beaten. The words began to come.
Somehow his extreme fatigue had lifted the censor in his mind and
he found himself explaining his ideas simply and efficiently. By six he
was in bed, hoping to get a little sleep before his meeting with his
boss at nine.
The only trouble was that at nine he was still in bed, having
forgotten to set the alarm before he went to sleep. When he arrived
in a panic at the office at noon, he knew from the look on his boss’s
face that no matter how good the proposal was, his days at Unger
were over. “Why don’t you find a place with a little bit more
flexibility?” his boss said, and thanked him for his proposal. “You’re
an idea man, Jim. Find a place that can accommodate to your style.”

“I don’t get it,” he said to Pauline over drinks several weeks later.
“I know I have more to offer than getting myself fired every six
months. But it’s always the same old story. Great ideas, but can’t get
it done. Even in high school, can you believe that? The guidance
counselor, she was this really nice lady, she told me that I had the
highest IQ in the class, and so she just couldn’t figure out why I had
such a hard time living up to my potential.”
“You know what’s not fair?” Pauline said, turning the stem of her
Manhattan glass between her thumb and forefinger. “They took the
ideas in your proposal and used them. Dramatic improvement.
Everybody’s happier and work is up. Those were your ideas, Jim, and
you got fired. It’s not fair.”
“I don’t know what’s wrong with me,” Jim said. “I don’t know what
to do.”
Jim had attention deficit disorder. When he came to see me at the
age of thirty-two, he had been living a life of chronic
underachievement, falling short of his goals both at work and in
relationships because of an underlying neurological problem that
made it difficult for him to pay attention, sustain effort, and

Jim had attention deficit disorder. When he came to see me at the
age of thirty-two, he had been living a life of chronic
underachievement, falling short of his goals both at work and in
relationships because of an underlying neurological problem that
made it difficult for him to pay attention, sustain effort, and
complete tasks.
ADD is a neurological syndrome whose classic defining triad of
symptoms include impulsivity, distractibility, and hyperactivity or
excess energy. About 18 million Americans have it today; while
awareness has increased in the years since Driven to Distraction was
first published, many still do not know that they have it. The
condition occurs in children and adults, men and women, boys and
girls, and it cuts across all ethnic groups, socioeconomic strata, levels
of education, and degrees of intelligence. It used to be thought that
this was a disorder of childhood alone, and that one outgrew it
during adolescence. We now know that only about a third of the ADD
population outgrows it; two-thirds have it throughout adulthood.
ADD is not a learning disability or a language disability or dyslexia,

and it is not associated with low intelligence. In fact, many people
who have ADD are very smart. It’s just that their smartness gets
tangled up inside. Undoing the tangle to get a smooth run on the line
can take more patience and perseverance than they can consistently
bring to bear.
Where does the syndrome begin and normal behavior leave off?
What is impulsivity? What is distractibility? How much energy is
excess? These are the questions we will explore throughout this
book, mainly in the context of individual cases, like Jim’s.
Considering the symptoms, can’t we all recognize parts of ourselves?
Yes. However, one bases the diagnosis of ADD not on the mere
presence of these symptoms, but on their severity and duration, and
the extent to which they interfere with everyday life.
When Jim came for consultation, he was at wit’s end. He came into
my office, sat down in one of the easy chairs, and began to run his
fingers through his curly hair. He leaned forward, alternately looking
at me or staring at the floor. “I don’t know where to begin. I don’t
even know what I’m doing here,” he said, shaking his head as if to
say no, this won’t help either.
“Did you have any trouble finding your way here?” I asked. He was
twenty minutes late, so I figured he might have gotten lost.
“Yes, yes, I did,” he said. “Your directions were fine, it wasn’t your
fault. I just turned left where I should have turned right and then I
was gonzo, school was out. It’s a miracle I got here at all. I ended up
at some gas station in Somerville.”
“Well, it can be pretty confusing,” I said, hoping to let him relax a
bit. Of the people who consult with me for problems related to ADD,
probably about a half are either late for their first appointment or
miss it altogether. I have come to expect it. It comes with the
territory. My patients, however, usually feel very bad about it and so

“Well, it can be pretty confusing,” I said, hoping to let him relax a
bit. Of the people who consult with me for problems related to ADD,
probably about a half are either late for their first appointment or
miss it altogether. I have come to expect it. It comes with the
territory. My patients, however, usually feel very bad about it and so

begin the session thinking that I am going to reprimand them in
some way. “You certainly aren’t the first person to get lost coming
here,” I said.
“Really?” he asked. “That’s good to hear.” He took a deep breath to
say something, but paused, as if the words had crowded in his throat,
then let his breath out in a long sigh, the words apparently dispersed.
He went through the same cycle a second time before I asked him if
maybe he could use a few moments just to collect his thoughts while
I wrote down some bits of information about him like his name,
address, and telephone number. That seemed to help. “OK,” Jim
said. “Let’s start.”
“OK,” I responded, leaning back in my chair, folding my hands
behind my head. There was another long pause, and another sigh
from Jim. “I can see that it’s hard for you to get started,” I said.
“Maybe we could focus on what the problem is that brought you
here.”
“Yes,” he said, “OK.” With that little bit of prodding from me, Jim
began to fill in most of his history. A normal childhood, or so it
seemed to him. But when I pressed for more detail, Jim
acknowledged that he was quite rambunctious in grade school and
enjoyed getting into mischief. He got good grades even though he
never really studied. “I thought school was like playtime,” he said.
But with high school, things got tougher. His innate intelligence
couldn’t carry him so easily anymore, and he began to fall behind. He
started to get lectures from his teachers and parents on his moral
shortcomings, how he was letting himself and everyone else down,
how in the long run he’d be the worse for it, and so forth. His selfesteem fell, although somehow his inborn temperament was buoyant
enough to keep him fairly upbeat. After stumbling through college,
he began a long series of jobs in various computer-related fields.
“You like computers?” I asked.

“I could have invented them,” he said with great enthusiasm. “I
love them. I just have this understanding of them, you know what I
mean? I know what makes them tick, and I know how to get the most
out of them. If only I could tell people what I know. If only I didn’t
screw up every time I get a chance—”
“How do you screw up?” I asked.
“How do I screw up?” he asked, then repeated the question again,
turning it into a sorrowful statement by his tone of voice. “How do I
screw up. I forget. I argue. I postpone. I procrastinate. I get lost. I get
mad. I don’t follow through. You name it, I do it. I’ll get into these
discussions with my boss, and I’ll see my way is right, and the next
thing you know, I’m calling him a stupid jerk for not seeing that I’m
right. Tends to get you fired, calling your boss a stupid jerk. Or I’ll
have this idea, but I won’t be able to find it, like it’s a jumble lost in
the closet or something. It’s in there, I know it’s in there, but I just
can’t get it out. I want to get it out, I try to get it out, but I can’t. One
of my old girlfriends told me before she left me that I should face it,
I’m just a loser. Maybe she’s right, I don’t know.”
“You cared about her?” I asked.

the closet or something. It’s in there, I know it’s in there, but I just
can’t get it out. I want to get it out, I try to get it out, but I can’t. One
of my old girlfriends told me before she left me that I should face it,
I’m just a loser. Maybe she’s right, I don’t know.”
“You cared about her?” I asked.
“For a while. But then she got fed up, like all the rest have. I mean,
I’m pretty intense to be with.”
“Where do you think that intensity comes from?” I asked.
“I don’t know,” he said. “It’s always been there, though.”
The longer we talked, the clearer it became how right Jim was,
how the intensity had always been there, seldom harnessed, but
always burning. That intensity may in part explain why ADD is
common among people in high-energy fields, from sales to
advertising to commodities to any high-pressure, high-stimulus kind
of work. “Have you ever consulted a psychiatrist before?” I asked.

“A couple of times,” Jim said. “They were nice guys, but nothing
really changed. One of them told me not to drink so much.”
“How much do you drink?”
“I binge. When I really want to let loose, I go out and tie one on.
It’s an old family tradition. My dad drank a lot. I guess you could say
he was an alcoholic. I don’t think I’m an alcoholic, but that’s what
they all say, huh? Anyway, I get these terrible hangovers the next
day, so I don’t go back to it for a while.”
Often people with ADD self-medicate with alcohol or marijuana or
cocaine. Cocaine, particularly, is similar to one of the medications
used in the pharmacological treatment of ADD.
Jim began to cross and uncross his legs a lot as we talked. “If
you’re feeling restless, feel free to pace a bit while we talk,” I said.
“Really? You don’t mind? Thanks a lot.” He stood up and began to
walk around, conducting his conversation with his arms as he spoke.
“This is great. Most people would get unnerved if I did this, but I
really think better when I walk. Is that weird? No wonder I had
trouble in school. You know, that’s half my problem. I’m always so
tied up inside. And you can imagine it doesn’t go over big at work if I
want to pace half the time.”
“I don’t know,” I said. “Maybe you just haven’t found the right
job.”
“You sound like all my bosses. Is there a right job for me?”
ADD comes in many shapes and sizes. In many people, particularly
adults, the symptoms of ADD are masked by more obvious problems,
such as depression or gambling or drinking, and the underlying ADD
is never detected. In other people the symptoms take on a particular
cast, congruent with the person’s personality as it evolves over time,
so that the symptoms are never really noticed the way symptoms of a

cold or flu might be but rather are dismissed as being part of “just
the way he is,” not warranting medical or psychiatric intervention.
And within the domain of properly diagnosed ADD there is also
much variability. Jim’s ADD, I was discovering, was the high-energy,
hyperactive type. But there is another kind of ADD that shows no
hyperactivity whatsoever. Indeed, these people can be underactive.
This is the child, often a girl, who sits at the back of the classroom
daydreaming, or the adult who moves serenely within a cloud, never
quite present anywhere.
“I don’t know if there is a right job for you,” I said, coming back to
Jim’s question. “For now I’d just like to hear more of your story.
Have you ever really told it before?”

This is the child, often a girl, who sits at the back of the classroom
daydreaming, or the adult who moves serenely within a cloud, never
quite present anywhere.
“I don’t know if there is a right job for you,” I said, coming back to
Jim’s question. “For now I’d just like to hear more of your story.
Have you ever really told it before?”
“No. Nobody can follow me. I go off on too many tangents, they all
say.”
“Well, you just keep talking, and let me do the organizing. That’s
what I’m paid for.”
Jim talked for a long while, over weeks. He told many stories of
misunderstanding, miscommunication, self-reproach,
underachievement, missed chances, angry people, and risky
behavior. It often seemed, as his mother had told him when he was
twelve, that he simply didn’t know enough to come in out of the rain.
He’d do foolish things, forget, and dilly-dally all the time. But he also
told stories of adventure, and kindness, of intuition and charm and
energy and enthusiasm. He told stories of big dreams and high hopes
and big disappointments as well. Baffled and frustrated, he never
blamed anyone but himself. He was a very likable guy, even though
he didn’t like himself very much.
And this is the case with so many people who have ADD. They are
very likable, although they get into the most difficult of patches. They
can be exasperating in the extreme—one mother called me about her
son, who had ADD and had just inadvertently almost set fire to his

school, and asked me if she could run over him in her truck—but they
can also be unusually empathic, intuitive, and compassionate, as if in
that tangled brain circuitry there is a special capacity to see into
people and situations.
Jim’s story took us through many twists and turns. There was the
time he had a job as a bus driver: one dreamy afternoon doing his
regular run he made what he thought was his last stop and headed
home for the bus yard only to pull into the lot with a bus half-full of
confused and angry customers. He had forgotten to make the actual
final stop on the line. “Where are we?” the passengers demanded.
“Where have you taken us?” It was Jim’s last ride for that bus
company. Or there was the time in conversation with a female
colleague when he referred to his boss as a “pinhead,” only to realize
almost as he was saying it that the female colleague was his boss’s
wife. “I don’t do it on purpose,” he said. “I just put my foot in my
mouth. I don’t think about who I’m talking to or where I am. Is it my
unconscious wish to fail?”
“It could be,” I said. “That sort of thing has been known to happen.
On the other hand, it could be something completely different.” I
began to tell Jim about ADD. “You see, it might be that you’re not a
screw-up or a loser at all, and that you do not have an unconscious
wish to sabotage yourself. It might be, and it is beginning to sound to
me as if this is very much the case, that you have a neurological
condition called attention deficit disorder. It’s no more a thing to be
ashamed of than being nearsighted is. In fact, it’s sort of like being
nearsighted. You don’t focus very well. You have to strain to see
clearly. People with ADD have trouble attending to one task at a
time. You’ve probably heard of hyperactive children, and that was
how this syndrome was originally described—hyperactivity in kids.
We now know that the symptoms include more than just
hyperactivity and that it affects adults as well as children. The

clearly. People with ADD have trouble attending to one task at a
time. You’ve probably heard of hyperactive children, and that was
how this syndrome was originally described—hyperactivity in kids.
We now know that the symptoms include more than just
hyperactivity and that it affects adults as well as children. The
hallmark symptoms of ADD are easy distractibility, impulsivity, and
sometimes, but not always, hyperactivity or excess energy. These
people are on the go. Type A personalities. Thrill seekers. High-

energy–, action-oriented–, bottom-line–, gotta-run–type people.
They have lots of projects going simultaneously. They’re always
scrambling. They procrastinate a lot and they have trouble finishing
things. Their moods can be quite unstable, going from high to low in
the bat of an eye for no apparent reason. They can be irritable, even
rageful, especially when interrupted or when making transitions.
Their memories are porous. They daydream a lot. They love highstimulus situations. They love action and novelty. Just as this kind of
problem can get in the way at work, it can also interfere with close
relationships. Your girlfriend can get the wrong impression if you’re
constantly tuning out or going for fast action.”
As I explained to Jim what attention deficit disorder was, I
watched him. He leaned forward in his chair and looked right at me.
He began to nod his head at the mention of each new symptom. An
excited look came over the face that had been so harried when we
first met. “When I was a kid,” he broke in, “it was always ‘Earth to
Jim!’ or ‘Where’s Jim?’ or ‘Jim, why don’t you just shape up?’ My
parents and my teachers just thought I was lazy. So I would get
punished or yelled at. For a while I yelled back, but then I just sort of
began to agree with them. I mean, what can you do? My dad had a
way of smacking me across the side of my head if I talked back. It
was kind of brutal, come to think of it. So I don’t think of it much. I
have to wonder, though, what kept me going. I mean, I never lost my
spunk. I remember a teacher in the sixth grade making me copy
pages out of a geography textbook because I had lost my homework.
She said if I would admit I just hadn’t done the homework instead of
lying and saying I’d lost it, she wouldn’t make me copy the pages.
Well, I had done the damn homework, so I was not about to say I
hadn’t. Well, she got ticked off and really lost it. She got into this
thing where she kept upping the ante, assuming I would back down.
She kept adding on pages for me to copy. When she reached a
hundred pages, she stopped. I stayed up all night copying those
pages, and I would have reached the hundred pages if my mother
hadn’t found me in the middle of the night. She made me stop. Plus
she went into school the next day and raised a big stink. Old Miss

She kept adding on pages for me to copy. When she reached a
hundred pages, she stopped. I stayed up all night copying those
pages, and I would have reached the hundred pages if my mother
hadn’t found me in the middle of the night. She made me stop. Plus
she went into school the next day and raised a big stink. Old Miss

Willmott had to apologize to me. To me! It was the most satisfying
moment of my entire educational career, bar none, and I’ll always
love my mother for it.”
“But I wish they had known then what you are telling me now,”
Jim went on. “There were so many stories. My whole ninth-grade
year was like one long war with my parents. They got into the same
thing Miss Willmott did, always upping the ante. Their basic idea
was that I wasn’t trying hard enough, so they kept coming up with
more and more punishments, none of which worked. It makes me
kind of sick to think back on it. It wasn’t my parents’ fault. They
didn’t know what was going on. Why didn’t anybody tell me about
this before?” Jim finally asked me in exasperation.
“People haven’t really known about it very much until fairly
recently,” I answered.
It can’t be said when ADD came into existence. The fidgety,
overactive child has been around, one may presume, for as long as
children have been around. And they have not been treated well.
The treatment of children has been terrible throughout history,
one of the consistent but little-mentioned black marks in almost
every epoch of human civilization; people have seldom differentiated
much when it comes to children who behaved “badly.” Too often, it
was simply recommended that these children be beaten, or in some
cases, killed. There is something in the most inhumane part of
human nature that enjoys hurting smaller and weaker beings,
particularly if they annoy us or make demands on us. It is beyond the
scope of this book to document the abuse of children that mars
human history; I bring it up in connection with ADD because it has
often been the overactive children, the ADD kids, who have been
subjected to the worst abuse. It is only recently that we have
conferred upon children rights beyond those of animals and decided
to look upon their “misbehavior” as possibly signifying something

other than satanic possession or a moral infirmity deserving
punishment.
So it is not surprising that although the syndrome we now call
ADD has been around for centuries, it was simply lumped together
with all other “bad behaviors.” It was not until this century that it
began to be recognized as a medical condition. Although it is hard to
say who first defined the syndrome, credit usually goes to British
pediatrician George Frederic Still, who, in a series of lectures to the
Royal College of Physicians in 1902, described some children in his
medical practice who were difficult to control, showing signs of
“lawlessness,” lacking “inhibitory volition,” and in general being
obstreperous, dishonest, and willful. He hypothesized that the
condition was not the result of bad parenting or moral turpitude, but
rather was biologically inherited or due to injury at birth.
The theme of injury at birth and brain damage continued in the
thirties and forties in the idea of the “brain-injured child.” Even
when no actual evidence of neurological impairment could be found,
“brain damage” was invoked to explain uncontrollable behavior. It
was during these decades that stimulant medication (amphetamine)

The theme of injury at birth and brain damage continued in the
thirties and forties in the idea of the “brain-injured child.” Even
when no actual evidence of neurological impairment could be found,
“brain damage” was invoked to explain uncontrollable behavior. It
was during these decades that stimulant medication (amphetamine)
was first tried, successfully, to help contain the behavior of some of
these children.
Other terms began to appear, some quite descriptive, such as
“organic drivenness,” others rather amorphous and bleak, like
“minimal brain dysfunction.” One had to wonder whether the brain
itself was minimal or the dysfunction was minimal or perhaps
whether the understanding of what was happening in the first place
was minimal.
Separating the symptom of hyperactivity from any notion of brain
damage, Stella Chess in 1960 and others around the same time began
to write about the “hyperactive child syndrome.” Chess saw the
symptoms as part of a “physiologic hyperactivity,” whose causes were
rooted in biology rather than the environment.

By the 1970s many major researchers were investigating the
syndrome of hyperactivity. Virginia Douglas, in Canada, began to
look broadly at the symptoms associated with hyperactivity and
found four major traits to account for the clinical picture: (1) deficits
in attention and effort, (2) impulsivity, (3) problems in regulating
one’s level of arousal, and (4) the need for immediate reinforcement.
In large part due to her work, in 1980 the syndrome was renamed
attention deficit disorder.
In the decades since that time, research has ballooned. Probably
the most up-to-date and definitive account of the history and current
state of the field is to be found in a book written by one of the great
researchers in the area, Russell Barkley; currently in its third edition,
his book is entitled, simply, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder.
“So what does it mean, exactly?” Jim asked me. “Does it mean I’m
stupid?”
“Not at all. But don’t let me tell you. You tell me. Are you stupid?” I
asked.
“No, I’m not. I know I’m not,” he said emphatically. “I’ve just had
this trouble all my life of getting out what’s inside.”
“Exactly,” I said. “That can be due to a lot of different things in
different people, but in your case I think it’s due to ADD.”
“Is it common?” he asked.
“Probably fifteen million people in this country have it, both
children and adults. It affects males more than females, probably in a
ratio of about three to one. We don’t know what causes it exactly, but
the best evidence is genetic. Other factors may contribute, like

problems at birth, but genetics is the main cause. Environmental
factors can make it a lot worse, but they don’t cause it.”
“You mean my mother didn’t screw me up?” he asked ironically.
“Not in this case. Maybe in other ways, who knows. Do you want to
blame her?”
“No, no. But I want to blame someone. Not blame someone, I just
want to get mad. It really pisses me off that no one told me about this
before. If this is just the way I’m wired—”
“Then,” I interrupted, “you don’t have to blame yourself.”
“Who is, of course, the person I’ve been blaming all along. But it is
my fault, isn’t it? I mean it doesn’t matter whether I’ve got ADD or
XYZ—if I’ve messed up, I’ve messed up and at my age there’s no one
but me to take the heat. Right?”
“In a way, I guess,” I said, rubbing my shoulder as if his words had

“Who is, of course, the person I’ve been blaming all along. But it is
my fault, isn’t it? I mean it doesn’t matter whether I’ve got ADD or
XYZ—if I’ve messed up, I’ve messed up and at my age there’s no one
but me to take the heat. Right?”
“In a way, I guess,” I said, rubbing my shoulder as if his words had
activated an old ache. “But what’s to gain in all the blame? I want to
give you a framework to understand yourself in such a way you can
forgive yourself and move on.”
“OK,” Jim said, “I get what you’re saying. What’s the bottom line,
though? Is there anything you can do for this?”
“ADD people love bottom lines,” I answered, laughing. “It’s always,
‘Get to the point’; ‘What’s the next show?’; ‘Where’s the beef?’ ”
“Yeah, you’re right,” he said. “I’m not big on scenery. I want to get
there. Is that bad?”
“I didn’t mean to put you on the defensive. I have ADD myself. I
know how it feels.”

“You have ADD?” Jim asked, apparently taken aback. “You seem
so calm.”
“Practice,” I said, smiling. “Actually, I’m sure for you there are
times when you can be quite focused and relaxed. For me, doing this
kind of work is one of those times. But the practice part is true also,
and we’ll get into that.”
From this point Jim’s treatment began. Actually, it had begun
already. Just finding out about the syndrome, finding at last that
there is a name for it, constitutes a large part of the treatment for
most people.
“What is it with me?” he asked in one session. “I don’t mean to be
rude. But this guy calls me up and he starts to tell me the materials I
sent him were the wrong ones, when I knew perfectly well they were
the right ones, he just didn’t know why they were the right ones, and
so he thought they were the wrong ones, and so immediately that
started to annoy me, but it wasn’t even that that got to me, it was his
tone of voice. Can you believe it? I knew from the first second he
started on the phone that I wanted to hang up on him or punch him.”
“You had like a rage reaction,” I offered.
“Damn straight. And when I think about it now, I get mad all over
again. So I tried to do what you said. Pause. Think of the
consequences. This was a good customer. I didn’t want to lose him
and I didn’t want him bad-mouthing me to his friends. So I paused.
But the more I paused, the more he talked on, in this really slow,
dumb voice, on and on, and I wanted to scream at him, ‘Get to the
point!’ So instead, I just cleared my throat. But then he said to me,
‘Don’t interrupt me, I’m not finished.’ Well, I lost it. I told him I
thought we could be on the phone until next Christmas and he still
wouldn’t be finished and I had better things to do and I hung up. Can
you believe that?”

I laughed. “I think you did very well. At least up until you lost it.
The guy was pushing your buttons. And let’s face it, there are going
to be times where you’re going to get annoyed and you’re going to
lose it. Treatment for ADD won’t take that away completely, and you
wouldn’t want it to, would you?”
“I guess not. But is this part of ADD, this rage reaction, as you call
it?”
“Yes,” I said. “It’s part of the impulsivity. If you think of ADD as a
basic problem with inhibition, it helps explain how ADD people get
angry quicker. They don’t inhibit their impulses as well as other
people. They lack the little pause between impulse and action that
allows most people to be able to stop and think. Treatment helps

“Yes,” I said. “It’s part of the impulsivity. If you think of ADD as a
basic problem with inhibition, it helps explain how ADD people get
angry quicker. They don’t inhibit their impulses as well as other
people. They lack the little pause between impulse and action that
allows most people to be able to stop and think. Treatment helps
with that but it doesn’t cure it completely.”
“You know what the funny thing was?” he asked. “The guy called
me back the next day and said he was sorry we had developed a
communication problem between us the day before and maybe we
could start over. A communication problem, can you believe that? I
said sure, only let me start this time. I explained to him in ten
seconds why what I had sent him was what he needed, he said he
understood and said thank you, I said, ‘No, it is me who should thank
you, I’m sorry for our communication problem yesterday,’ and we
said goodbye, best of friends.” Jim slapped his knee.
“How do you like that?” I said. “Your guardian angel must have
been on duty.”
“But where does it come from, this anger?”
“Can you tell me?” I asked.
“I think it’s built up over the years. When I was a little kid, I was all
over the place, but I wasn’t angry. I think it built up, in school. All the
failures. All the frustration.” Jim clenched his fists without knowing
it as he talked about his feelings. “It got so I knew before I started

something it wasn’t going to work out. So all I had left was tenacity. I
wouldn’t give up. But, damn, why didn’t I, with all the screw-ups I
had to show for my efforts?”
Jim was beginning to get into what is a large and very important
part of ADD, although, strictly speaking, it is not part of the
neurological syndrome itself. He was starting to talk about the
secondary psychological problems that typically develop in the wake
of the primary neurological problem of ADD.
Due to repeated failures, misunderstandings, mislabelings, and all
manner of other emotional mishaps, children with ADD usually
develop problems with their self-image and self-esteem. Throughout
childhood, at home and at school they are told they are defective.
They are called dumb, stupid, lazy, stubborn, willful, or obnoxious.
They hear terms like “spaceshot” or “daydreamer” or “out in left
field” all the time. They are blamed for the chaos of family mealtimes
or the disaster of family vacations. They are reprimanded for
classroom disturbances of all sorts and they are easily scapegoated at
school. They are the subject of numerous parent-teacher
conferences. Time and again, an exasperated teacher meets a
frustrated parent in a meeting that later explodes all over the child
who isn’t there. He feels the shock waves afterward. “Do you know
what your teacher said? Do you know how embarrassed your mother
and I were?” Or, from the teacher, “I understand you have no greater
control of yourself at home than you do in school. We must work on
this, mustn’t we?”
Month after month, year after year, the tapes of negativity play
over and over again until they become the voice the child knows best.
“You’re bad,” they say in many different ways. “You’re dumb. You
just don’t get it. You’re so out of it. You really are pathetic.” This
voice pulls the child’s self-esteem down and down, out of the reach of
the helping hands that might be extended, into the private world of
adolescent self-reproach. Liking yourself in adolescence is hard

“You’re bad,” they say in many different ways. “You’re dumb. You
just don’t get it. You’re so out of it. You really are pathetic.” This
voice pulls the child’s self-esteem down and down, out of the reach of
the helping hands that might be extended, into the private world of
adolescent self-reproach. Liking yourself in adolescence is hard

enough work for any child. But for the child with ADD it is especially
difficult.
“You kept up your efforts, but it must have been tough,” I said to
Jim.
“It sure was,” he responded with a kind of ruefulness in his voice
that said to me, You don’t know the half of it.”
“Tell me about it,” I said.
“It’s just that I wouldn’t know where to begin. By high school they
almost had me convinced I was just plain stupid. I mean, I couldn’t
figure it out. I could understand the stuff in class. I could follow what
was said. I could even jump ahead in my mind. But when it came to
writing the papers or getting the assignments organized or taking
tests, everything just went out the window. I would try. Believe me, I
would try. I got lectures all the time on how I didn’t try, but I did try.
It’s just that the bigger sledgehammer didn’t work. I’d lock myself in
my room and before you knew it I was gone. Doing something else.
Reading. Listening to music. Then I’d catch myself and try and get to
studying again, but goddamn it, it just didn’t work.” Jim’s voice got
harsh and his face turned red.
“It all comes back, huh,” I said.
“It sure does. They’d tell me to try harder. Over and over again. Try
harder. And I’d try harder and it wouldn’t work. After a while I
figured I didn’t have the brain to do it. And at the same time I knew I
did. But it just didn’t work out.”
“So you were frustrated all the time. No wonder you felt angry.”
“Do you think that’s why I started drinking? I felt better after I had
a few pops. But doesn’t everybody?”

“Sure,” I said. “But it is likely that you had special reasons to drink.
You were medicating yourself, as so many people with ADD do.
Alcohol, marijuana, cocaine are all common. In different ways each
of those drugs calms you down. But only in the short run. In the long
run, they can all be disastrous.”
“I think I knew that. I think that’s why I never let myself develop a
regular habit. I thought that would really be the end of the line for
me.” Jim paused. “Why cocaine? I thought that juiced you up.”
“It does for most people. For people with ADD, however, it helps
them focus. So, without knowing it, when they use cocaine they are
medicating themselves.”
“No kidding. Anyway, I’m just glad I found out about this before I
let my whole life get away.”
“How did it affect your relationships with other people?” I asked.
“I didn’t think about it at the time, but all the things we’ve been
talking about got in the way with friends and girls and everyone else.
I wouldn’t listen—”
“Couldn’t listen,” I corrected him.
“OK, couldn’t. But everybody else thought wouldn’t. I’d be late for
things, or I wouldn’t show up at all, having forgot. I wouldn’t hear
things right, so I wouldn’t respond right—you know the story. People
thought I was arrogant or I just didn’t care. I did have a short fuse,
that much was true. When someone would call me on something, I’d
just tell them to kiss off. Didn’t make me real popular. But still I had
friends. Most important of all, Pauline stuck with me. Sometimes I
wonder why. I would forget things, not show up, get angry or

thought I was arrogant or I just didn’t care. I did have a short fuse,
that much was true. When someone would call me on something, I’d
just tell them to kiss off. Didn’t make me real popular. But still I had
friends. Most important of all, Pauline stuck with me. Sometimes I
wonder why. I would forget things, not show up, get angry or
depressed for no reason. I’d be talking to her, and then I would
disappear into some daydream. I’d promise to do something with
her, and then I would forget. Somehow, she didn’t dump me. But it
sure wasn’t easy. We always seemed to be in the midst of some

potential argument. There’s always been a fight waiting to happen.
When I would screw up at work, she offered encouragement, but I
could tell she was thinking, What is it with this guy? I was thinking
the same thing. I don’t think I could have survived this long without
Pauline. She’s incredible. But the relationship has been awful tough
on her. I’m just not an easy guy. I know that. I know I’m
exasperating. I’m exasperating to myself. I wish to hell I weren’t.
Believe me, I’m not like this on purpose. I think Pauline believes
that, too, deep down. Otherwise how could she have stuck with me?”
“She probably does. But you’re a good guy, Jim. People put up with
your annoying habits because you made it worth their while in other
ways.”
An important, and often overlooked part of both learning
disabilities and ADD is the social consequence of having them. ADD
can interfere with one’s interpersonal life just as dramatically as it
does with one’s academic or job performance. To make friends, you
have to be able to pay attention. To get along in a group, you have to
be able to follow what is being said in the group. Social cues are often
subtle: the narrowing of eyes, the raising of eyebrows, a slight change
in tone of voice, a tilting of the head. Often the person with ADD
doesn’t pick up on these cues. This can lead to real social gaffes or a
general sense of being out of it. Particularly in childhood, where
social transactions happen so rapidly and the transgressor of norms
is dealt with so pitilessly, a lapse in social awareness due to the
distractibility or impulsivity of ADD can preclude acceptance by a
group or deny understanding from a friend.
“I sometimes wonder how I made it this far without getting killed,”
Jim laughed. “Must be the luck of the Irish.”
“Could be,” I said. “But maybe you learned little tricks along the
way without even knowing it. In a sense, having ADD was part of
your ethnicity, too. It defined how you were, what was in your bones,
just as much as your Irish heritage did, but in different ways.”

Jim’s treatment lasted about a year. It included psychotherapy
once a week as well as small doses of medication. The psychotherapy
was more like coaching than traditional psychotherapy in that it was
educational, informative, directive, and explicitly encouraging. I
cheered Jim on from the sidelines. I helped him build a new
understanding of himself, taking into account his ADD, and I helped
him build ways of organizing and structuring his life so that ADD
wouldn’t get in the way so much. The medication helped him focus
and stay on task. As he put it, it took the static out of the broadcast.
We will discuss treatment in detail in chapter 8, but as an
introduction, here is a synopsis of the most effective components of
treatment. Note that while the medications used for ADD can

wouldn’t get in the way so much. The medication helped him focus
and stay on task. As he put it, it took the static out of the broadcast.
We will discuss treatment in detail in chapter 8, but as an
introduction, here is a synopsis of the most effective components of
treatment. Note that while the medications used for ADD can
provide remarkable help, they are not the whole treatment by any
means. A comprehensive program works best.
SYNOPSIS OF TREATMENT OF ADD
1. Diagnosis: The first step in treatment is making the
diagnosis. Often this carries with it considerable relief as the
individual feels, “At last there’s a name for it!” The therapy
begins with the diagnosis.
2. Education: The more one can learn about ADD, the more
successful the therapy will be. A thorough understanding of
what ADD is allows you to better understand where ADD
affects your life and what to do about it. It also allows you to
take the key step of explaining it to other people.
3. Structuring: Structure refers to the external limits and
controls people with ADD so urgently need. Such concrete,
practical tools as lists, reminders, simple filing systems,
appointment books, goals, daily planning, and the like can
greatly reduce the inner chaos of an ADD life and improve
productivity as well as one’s sense of control.

4. Coaching and/or Psychotherapy: The person with ADD
will greatly benefit from having a “coach,” someone standing
on the sidelines with a whistle around his neck calling out
encouragement, instructions, and reminders, and in general
helping to keep things going on task. People with ADD thrive
with this sort of structured encouragement, and they feel lost
without it. Group therapy can provide this most excellently.
Traditional psychotherapy may also be indicated if
depression, problems with self-esteem, or other internal
problems exist.
5. Medication: There are several medications that can help
correct many of the symptoms of ADD. The medication works
like a pair of eyeglasses, helping the individual to focus. It can
also reduce the sense of inner turmoil and anxiety that is so
common with ADD. The medication works by correcting a
chemical imbalance of neurotransmitters that exists in ADD
in the parts of the brain that regulate attention, impulse
control, and mood. While medication is not the whole answer,
it can provide profound relief, and when it is used properly, it
is very safe.
In Jim’s case treatment went very well. By the time we parted
company, he had changed his life. Within eight months he began to
put together his own computer consulting business, specializing in
some kind of software manipulation I never did understand, but one
that few others could understand and a lot of people wanted, so his
business grew. Being his own boss, he didn’t have the kinds of
troubles with superiors he’d had before. Of course, he did have to
relate appropriately with clients, and this was a skill he worked on.
He settled into his relationship with Pauline in a way that pleased
them both. He had developed a series of techniques for managing
himself, as he put it. No longer shooting himself in the foot, he was
beginning to make use of the creative brain he’d always had.

relate appropriately with clients, and this was a skill he worked on.
He settled into his relationship with Pauline in a way that pleased
them both. He had developed a series of techniques for managing
himself, as he put it. No longer shooting himself in the foot, he was
beginning to make use of the creative brain he’d always had.

Case 2: Carolyn
Carolyn Deauville came to see me one afternoon, “just to chat.”
When she made the appointment, she told me over the phone, long
distance, in her rich southern accent, “Honey, I know what I’ve got. I
just want you to sit there and nod and listen.”
Carolyn strode into my office, all five feet ten inches of her,
wearing a pastel orange chiffon dress with a white sash and a beige
broad-brimmed hat. She wore peach-colored lipstick and smelled of
a perfume that immediately filled the room, very pleasantly, but not
subtly. Like her perfume, Carolyn filled the room quickly. “You don’t
mind if I do this?” she asked, lighting up a Vantage. Exhaling smoke,
she opened her blue eyes wide and looked right at me. “I feel like
we’re old friends. I’ve heard you speak. I’ve read some of your
articles. We both have ADD. I’m a therapist, you’re a therapist. Lord,
we’re practically neighbors. Except I’m from three thousand miles
away in California.”
“California?” I asked. “I would have guessed—”
“From my accent, you would have guessed somewhere in the
South, and you would have been right, since I grew up in New
Orleans. But marriage number two took me to the Golden Gate, and
I’ve never been back.”
“You said on the phone you just wanted to chat.”
“I’ve been a psychologist for twenty years now and I’ve been
specializing in ADD for the past ten. I’ve never told anyone my story,
and I thought you’d be a good person to start with, since I liked you
from the way you talked.”
We agreed to have a few appointments. She was in town with her
husband at a convention for his business. She’d be here a few days.
As her story unfolded, I had to marvel at her resilience and
ingenuity. “I’m an orphan, or at least I used to be. My mother got

pregnant and Catholic teenage girls in Louisiana in the thirties didn’t
have abortions. So here I am. I was adopted when I was two. What a
mismatch my mother and I were. She was a wonderful lady and I
love her dearly, but she was so ladylike and organized, and I, well, I
wasn’t. My mama couldn’t civilize me, try as she might. I sat with my
legs apart, I bit my nails, I let my skirt ride up, I got dirty all the time,
I was a real pigpen. My first vivid memory is running away from
Summation Bible School at age four. It was so boring. Jimmy
Tundooras and I tiptoed out the back door and ran down the dirt
road toward the river. After a little while Jimmy got scared and went
back, but not me. I wandered all over town until I fell down asleep.
They found me late that afternoon in a ditch by the side of the road.
Did Mama give me what for. Must’ve wondered why she ever went to
that orphanage.
“My next best memory is sitting on top of the water tower. Must
not have been a day over six. Once I learned how to climb up to the
top of that tower, I did it all the time. Sometimes, after I learned to
read, I’d put a book in my teeth and climb up and sit all afternoon
reading. Can you believe it? Whenever I drive past a water tower
today, I shiver. They’re very high! Back then I remember dangling
my feet over the side and looking down and saying, ‘O-o-o-o-e-e-e.’ ”

top of that tower, I did it all the time. Sometimes, after I learned to
read, I’d put a book in my teeth and climb up and sit all afternoon
reading. Can you believe it? Whenever I drive past a water tower
today, I shiver. They’re very high! Back then I remember dangling
my feet over the side and looking down and saying, ‘O-o-o-o-e-e-e.’ ”
“Didn’t anybody tell you not to go up there?” I asked.
“Nobody knew I did,” she answered in a whisper, as if it were
supposed to remain secret to this day. “Oh, I was a devil of a kid, or
so Mama said, but she loved me, too. It’s just that I was always into
things. Saturdays. I hated Saturdays. Some inexplicable uneasiness
would come over me on Saturdays. I didn’t know why then, but
looking back I can see that it was because on Saturday all my sins of
the week would be discovered. Mama was a schoolteacher and too
busy to notice during the week, but come Saturday she’d inspect my
clothes and find that one white cotton glove I needed for church was
missing, or was filthy dirty. Or that I’d torn the sash for my dress. Or
that a bunch of clothes were missing. I was in the habit of giving

away clothes to the kids at the orphanage. I didn’t know that I was
adopted, so I don’t know why I gave my clothes away, but I did.
Mama would despair.”
“And your father?” I asked.
“Daddy was like the pied piper. He loved children, and he loved
me. Which was lucky, because I needed all the love I could get.
Especially after I started school and after Warren was born. After all
the trouble Mama had getting pregnant, what does she do but
produce a menopause baby, Warren, my brother. He was an angel as
much as I was a devil. They might as well have put a halo over his
head. And school? Well, my first memory of school is getting
spanked by Mrs. Kimble for not being able to lie still on my pallet. I
never did lie still, or sit still for that matter.
“I was slow to learn how to read, but once I did, I was a voracious
reader. Little Women, The Secret Garden, Hans Brinker—these were
my books. On top of the water tower, under the kitchen table,
wherever I could find a spot to be left alone, I’d tug a book out of my
pocket and read. Math was a disaster. They had flash cards, and one
student would pass them out to all of us. I used to save my dessert to
bribe whoever was doing the passing out to give me the easy cards. I
especially liked the zero cards, one plus zero equals …? I always
despaired when they had a dessert I couldn’t sequester in my pocket
or under my dress, like pudding. Even pie I got pretty good at
hiding.”
“You do sound like a happy kid, in spite of it all,” I said.
“I was. I’ve always been happy. I think it’s temperament, and it’s
the luckiest thing in the world. Even when I had every reason not to
be, I was happy. I always found a way. Once, in second grade, I was
being punished for having smacked Nancy Smitt by being told to
stand behind a table away from the other kids. This was on a
morning parents were coming through to visit, so it was supposed to

the luckiest thing in the world. Even when I had every reason not to
be, I was happy. I always found a way. Once, in second grade, I was
being punished for having smacked Nancy Smitt by being told to
stand behind a table away from the other kids. This was on a
morning parents were coming through to visit, so it was supposed to

be particularly embarrassing and humiliating for me to have to stand
off to the side behind this table. Well, what did I do? The table came
about up to my mid-section, so I just rubbed up against it and let my
mind drift away as everybody passed through. I’m sure no one
noticed, and I’m sure I hardly even knew that I was masturbating
right there in public view in the second-grade classroom.
“I always did talk too much,” Carolyn said, as if she thought she
still did. But I didn’t think so. I loved hearing her story, particularly
the way she told it, from incident to incident, all in the thickest and
softest southern voice. “The hardest thing about it all was getting
teased so much. I was so reactive. All my emotions were on the
surface. Someone would make a face at me, and I’d stick my tongue
out right back. Someone would whisper something about me, and I’d
jump on their back. Also, I cried really easily. Someone would hurt
my feelings, and boohoo, the tears would come. Well, you know how
kids home in on that. So I was always getting teased. Daddy would
coach me on how to ignore it, but I never could. In third grade I beat
up two boys on the playground, and that was at a time when girls
simply did not fight, let alone fight boys. Mama was mortified, but
Daddy took me aside and told me he was proud.
“Poor Mama, she got mortified a lot. In sixth grade my teacher got
so fed up with looking at my messy desk—strewn with bits of paper,
balled-up gum, a bent fork, and even old desserts—that she took a
few brown paper bags and emptied it all for me to take home to show
my mother after school. Mama was mortified once again.
“She tried so hard to make me be a lady. I wanted to peroxide my
hair, but she said no. What did I do? I was such a slob. I took lipstick
and tried to streak my hair with that instead. It just became a greasy
mess. I was forever stuffing my chest with rolled-up socks. Except I
didn’t do that very skillfully either. One day a sock popped out of my
dress in tenth-grade science class. You can imagine the reaction.

“Somehow, though, I got through. All my reading must have paid
off, because I scored high on achievement tests and got a scholarship
to college. At the time, I was amazed I did so well on the tests, as was
everybody else. There were even whispers that I must have cheated.
But knowing what I know, I think I did well because I was so
motivated I went into one of those hyperfocused states people with
ADD can go into. For once Mama wasn’t mortified. And I scraped my
way through college and got into graduate school, which I did parttime since I was having babies. Then I quit school completely for a
few years before going back and finishing my Ph.D. and becoming
the woman you see sitting before you now.”
“You never knew you had attention deficit disorder?” I asked.
“Never. Not until I diagnosed myself well after graduate school.
What do you think? Do I fit the picture?”
“Yes, you surely do,” I said. “How did you feel when you discovered
you’d had ADD all along?”
“Just this huge relief. At last there was a name for it, especially all

“You never knew you had attention deficit disorder?” I asked.
“Never. Not until I diagnosed myself well after graduate school.
What do you think? Do I fit the picture?”
“Yes, you surely do,” I said. “How did you feel when you discovered
you’d had ADD all along?”
“Just this huge relief. At last there was a name for it, especially all
the emotional reactivity that got me teased so much. I had thought I
was a typical female hysteric or something. Plus everything else. The
not sitting still, the going up the water tower, the fights, being a
mess, having trouble in school. Things fit into place. The best thing
was getting a name for it. I’d pretty much figured out how to handle
it by the time I found out I had it.”
“Why did you want to see me?” I asked.
“To get a second opinion,” she said. “I’ve only had myself to
confirm my diagnosis.”
“Well,” I said, “it sounds like pretty classic ADD to me. We could
get some testing to get further confirmation. But you could have
done that already. And I think you know you have ADD. Are you sure
there isn’t some other reason you came here?” I asked.

Carolyn, who had told her story virtually without missing a beat or
coming up for air, paused. She took her hat off, which revealed her
whole face from broad forehead to pointed, definite chin, and she
shook out her light brown hair. Tall, elegant, secure, she surprised
me by what she said next. “I wanted you to tell me I’d done a good
job,” she said softly. “That sounds infantile, I’m sure, but you can’t
imagine what an effort it’s been. Actually, I thought perhaps you
would know how much it’s taken, since you see so many people like
me.”
“Not many people like you,” I said. “You never got any help along
the way and you’ve overcome your obstacles just by intuition and
persistence. You’ve done an amazing job, Carolyn. You’ve done very
well. You should feel proud.”
“Thank you,” she said. “I needed to hear that from someone who
really knew.”
Carolyn’s story is remarkable in some ways and representative in
others. As a child, her symptoms were typical: hyperactivity, thrillseeking, trouble in school, emotional intensity, and impulsivity. She
also had many of the positive qualities that are often not mentioned
when one hears about ADD: spunk, resilience, persistence, charm,
creativity, and hidden intellectual talent. What was remarkable was
that she was able to develop her talents without any special help. She
did not get buried under the teasing she received; she did not lose
her positive sense of who she was, or who she could be. In many
ways the most dangerous aspect of undiagnosed and untreated ADD
is the assault to self-esteem that usually occurs. Whatever talents
these people may have, they often never get to use them because they
give up, feeling lost and stupid. Carolyn is a wonderful example of
someone who prevailed.

her positive sense of who she was, or who she could be. In many
ways the most dangerous aspect of undiagnosed and untreated ADD
is the assault to self-esteem that usually occurs. Whatever talents
these people may have, they often never get to use them because they
give up, feeling lost and stupid. Carolyn is a wonderful example of
someone who prevailed.

Case 3: Maria
Maria Berlin came to me for a consultation after reading a piece in
the newspaper about ADD in adults. “I didn’t know there was such a
thing,” she said, crossing her legs at the calf as she settled back into
my overstuffed office couch. “My husband showed me this article in
the paper, and I started to wonder.”
“Tell me a little about yourself,” I said. It is always hard to know
where to jump in when I meet a patient for the first time. There is a
standard way of taking a history—name, address, presenting
problem, and so forth—but that can be overly structured and not give
the person the chance to say what they really want to say. So I
usually start with something that invites the person to say whatever
he or she thinks matters. Of course, this can be misleading as well,
because the inevitable jitters associated with the first appointment
can lead one far astray.
Maria, however, got right into things. “I don’t know what is wrong
with me—maybe there’s nothing. Whatever it is, I’ve been like this
for a long time. As long as I can remember. Since I’m now forty-one,
that’s a long time. My main problem is that I don’t get around to
doing the things I want to do. Maybe that’s just the pace of my life.
I’m married and I have two children, eleven and eight, and they take
up a lot of my time. But I have been working on my Ph.D. for years,
and the dissertation keeps sitting there, half-done, winking at me like
a sleeping turtle. Sometimes I wish it would walk away and leave me
alone.”
“Do you have a regular job as well?” I asked.
“Yes. Well, when I want to, that is. I work at the library in town,
and they’re very flexible about when I come and go. What I’ve really
been trying to do, aside from finishing my dissertation, is start an
exercise clinic for women over forty at our local health club. I have a
brochure I’ve been wanting to write for what seems like forever. The
management of the place has been very receptive. If I ever get to it,

they’ll let me run it as my own business if I pay them a small rent.
They think it would be good publicity for the club.”
“Your Ph.D. is in—”
“Totally unrelated. English literature. Don’t ask me what the
connection between that and exercise is. I’m sure there is one
somewhere, but I don’t know where. My dissertation is supposed to
be on Eugene O’Neill. I fell in love with O’Neill when I read A Long
Day’s Journey into Night when I was in high school, and that love
continued through graduate school. But in case anyone hasn’t told
you, the best way to fall out of love with something is to write a Ph.D.
thesis about it. I’m so tired of O’Neill I could spit. Isn’t that sad? I
thought at one time I had something original to say about him, but
now I couldn’t care less.”
“Do you remember what you had set out to say?” I asked.
“Oh, please,” she said, “don’t make me dredge that up. It had to do
with the autobiographical impulse and transforming that into art.
Sounds pretty unoriginal, huh. But I had a new twist on it, or at least
I thought I did. Maybe it was all just a daydream.”

“Do you remember what you had set out to say?” I asked.
“Oh, please,” she said, “don’t make me dredge that up. It had to do
with the autobiographical impulse and transforming that into art.
Sounds pretty unoriginal, huh. But I had a new twist on it, or at least
I thought I did. Maybe it was all just a daydream.”
“You got sidetracked?”
“Sidetracked?” she said with a big smile. “My whole life is one long
sidetrack. I was supposed to marry Arthur, but instead I met Jim,
and now we’ve been married for sixteen years.”
“You haven’t been sidetracked from him?”
“No, I haven’t. He’s my anchor. I don’t know why he hasn’t been
sidetracked from me, but I don’t think he has. ‘Anchor’ is the wrong
word, actually. It makes it sound like he’s holding me back. What he
does is stabilize me. I don’t know where I’d be without him.”

Maria’s energy and openness and her story so far were all typical of
ADD, as was her tendency to get sidetracked, both in her life and in
her conversation with me. “Tell me more.”
“About what? I’m not trying to be a wiseguy, but what do you need
to know?”
“Well, tell me something about your childhood. In particular, what
was school like for you?”
“School was a real mixed bag. I loved to read from day one, but I
was a very slow reader. The public school where I grew up was OK,
but not very challenging. I got fair grades. They always said I could
do better, but I was more interested in looking out the window or at
some other kid. The classroom material was just very dull. It wasn’t
where the action was, as far as I was concerned.”
“You graduated from high school?”
“Barely, but I did. Then in college I did really well. Can you
imagine that? Which is why I went to graduate school. But that was
probably a big mistake. I should have quit while I was ahead. You
see, my problem is I don’t know whether I’m smart or if I’m stupid.
I’ve done well, and I’ve done poorly, and I’ve been told that I’m gifted
and I’ve been told that I’m slow. I don’t know what I am.”
“It is not unusual for people with ADD to have erratic, inconsistent
educational histories like yours,” I said. “Were you hyperactive as a
child?” I asked. “Or any kind of discipline problem?”
“Oh, no,” Maria said. “I was a good little girl. I wanted to please,
whenever I could. I didn’t want to please so much that I paid
attention in class—my father used to say, ‘If you really want to make
your dad happy you’ll pay attention in class’—but I never disobeyed
or acted up or anything like that. I just always had a fantasy world I
could go off into.”

“You got bored easily?”
“I’ll say,” Maria answered. “But then, maybe I had dull teachers. I
wasn’t bored in college.”
“What’s in your way now?” I asked.
“The same thing that’s always been. My erratic nature. One minute
I’m there and then the next I’m not. I don’t finish things. I get
started, and then I drift off to something else, and then I’ve forgotten
about what I had started on in the first place.”
“How did you get into exercise?” I asked. Maria was obviously
quite fit. She didn’t look forty-one—maybe ten years younger. Dark
hair, red lipstick, bright cheeks—she looked like she could have
played a part onstage. I wasn’t surprised that she had taken up
exercise. Aside from being one of our culture’s preoccupations, it is
remarkably good therapy for ADD, both focusing and relaxing the
mind.
“Like everything else, it just happened. I had a friend who wanted

hair, red lipstick, bright cheeks—she looked like she could have
played a part onstage. I wasn’t surprised that she had taken up
exercise. Aside from being one of our culture’s preoccupations, it is
remarkably good therapy for ADD, both focusing and relaxing the
mind.
“Like everything else, it just happened. I had a friend who wanted
me to take an aerobics class with her, and I said that sounded like
death, but she persuaded me to do it. To my complete amazement I
loved it. I’m not a fitness freak; I just loved how the aerobics made
me feel. And I liked the social aspects of it. So I began to hang
around the club, took extra classes, qualified as an instructor, and
came up with this ‘over-forty’ idea, which I still think is a great idea
but one I’ll probably never get to.”
“How have you dealt with yourself so far?” I asked, thinking as
soon as I asked it that it was a dumb question. But Maria seemed to
understand what I meant.
“Just by winging it. I thought I had a screw loose somewhere. I
went to a shrink once. It was when I was still very invested in trying
to get my dissertation done and I thought maybe I had some kind of

block he could cure me of. But we really didn’t get anywhere, so I
stopped going. Now you.”
“Yes, now me,” I said. “At your husband’s urging?”
“No, this was my idea. He just showed me the article. What do you
think? Is there any hope for me?” she asked with mock melodrama.
“You’re joking,” I said, “but I have a hunch this has been more
painful for you than you let on.”
“Yes, yes it has,” Maria said, looking past me out the window. “It’s
such an insidious thing. I’ve always known there was something
wrong, but I thought it was dyed into me, if you know what I mean.
But with two kids, a husband, and a world to keep up with, I don’t let
myself dwell on it too much. It sure would be nice, though, to begin
to finish things at least.”
“Yes,” I said. “It’s been very frustrating for you. How about
reading? Can you read OK?” I asked.
“If by OK you mean ‘Do the words get in?’ then yes. But I’m a very
slow reader. Always have been. Plus I get distracted in the middle of
a page and there’s no telling when I’ll come back.”
“Maria,” I said, “I think you might have ADD. We’ll want to do
some tests and talk some more about your history, but everything
you’ve said so far makes me think you’ve had ADD ever since you
were a child. The daydreaming, the way you read, the getting
sidetracked, your erratic nature, as you call it, your inconsistency,
and your general sense of not knowing for sure how bright you are,
all these things may be manifestations of ADD. You’ve compensated
well, which is to say you’ve found ways of getting along, but you
haven’t done the things you’ve wanted to do.”
“What does that mean? Can my life be different?”

“It is always difficult to answer that question in advance,” I said.
“You just don’t know how the treatment for ADD will work before
you try it. But, yes, things can be different if the treatment works.”
It turned out that Maria did not respond to medication. While
about 85 percent of adults will benefit from one of the several
medications that are used for ADD, about 15 percent do not, for one
reason or another. Some people have side effects to the medication
they cannot tolerate. Some people simply find they do not like the
way it makes them feel. Some people do not want to try medication
at all. And for some people, like Maria, the medication just does not

medications that are used for ADD, about 15 percent do not, for one
reason or another. Some people have side effects to the medication
they cannot tolerate. Some people simply find they do not like the
way it makes them feel. Some people do not want to try medication
at all. And for some people, like Maria, the medication just does not
do anything.
However, as we have mentioned, there is more to the treatment for
ADD than just medication. Education, behavioral modification, and
psychotherapy all can help. Maria derived benefit from all of these.
In the first phase of her treatment we focused on developing an
understanding of ADD. As Maria learned about the syndrome, she
was able to rethink many of her long-held views about herself: that
she had “a screw loose,” that she was not competent, that she was
defective.
As she began to see how many of her problems related to her being
unusually distractible, we began to set up ways of restructuring her
time to help her focus. She began to employ traits she knew about
herself but had not used to best advantage: that she worked best in
short spurts; that exercise helped her focus; that she benefited from
lists, reminders, schedules, and rituals; that large, seemingly
overwhelming tasks could actually get done if she broke them down
into a series of small, manageable tasks; that she needed frequent
feedback and encouragement; that it helped her to have someone, in
this instance me, act as a kind of coach, keeping her on track.
This was not traditional psychotherapy, but a variant of therapy
that I call “coaching” to stress the active, encouraging role played by

the therapist or “coach.” I would not tell Maria what to do, but rather
I would ask her what she wanted to do; then I would remind her of
what she had told me, regularly and repeatedly. One might say that
at the beginning of her treatment we agreed upon a “game plan,” and
that my role as coach was to remind her of her goals and objectives in
an encouraging way, always with an eye toward keeping her on track.
People with ADD can get off course so easily, they can so frequently
get “sidetracked,” to use Maria’s term, that it can be very helpful to
have an outside person keep them engaged.
Done this way, the therapy can act as a structuring force in the
person’s life, bringing her back, time and again, to where she wants
to be but has trouble staying on her own. This is not
psychoanalytically oriented psychotherapy, in that it does not
depend upon the development and interpretation of transference,
but the therapist does stand ready to receive and discuss the
individual’s hopes, fears, fantasies, and dreams. And such coaching
therapy does encourage the development of insight. Indeed, insight
is one of the most powerfully transforming factors in working with
people with ADD.
We should add that both authors of this book respect the value of
psychoanalysis, both in treating patients and in researching and
understanding human nature. Psychoanalysis remains the definitive
and most thorough treatment available for what is commonly called
neurotic conflict or pain. We do not recommend it as a specific
therapy for ADD—indeed, psychoanalyzing someone with
undiagnosed ADD can be frustratingly ineffective—but once the ADD
has been diagnosed and treated, the psychoanalysis can proceed
apace. Certainly, the kinds of neurotic conflicts for which
psychoanalysis is the definitive treatment can occur in people who

therapy for ADD—indeed, psychoanalyzing someone with
undiagnosed ADD can be frustratingly ineffective—but once the ADD
has been diagnosed and treated, the psychoanalysis can proceed
apace. Certainly, the kinds of neurotic conflicts for which
psychoanalysis is the definitive treatment can occur in people who
have ADD, and the treatment for ADD will not resolve those
conflicts. Such people can benefit greatly from psychoanalysis as
long as their ADD is understood as well.

Maria rearranged her view of herself and her way of running her
life. In our work together the combination of education,
encouragement, “coaching,” and insight led Maria to a new place.
She completed her brochure for the health club and opened her
business. It did very well. She decided she did not want to write her
dissertation, that, really, she had never wanted to. She had been
keeping it alive, as many people with ADD do, as an organizing
principle in her life, something that although it regularly and
predictably emanated pain and anxiety, still provided an axis around
which she could organize. She replaced her daily mantra of “I haven’t
done my thesis, I must do my thesis” with more useful selfdirections. As she began to achieve success at something she really
wanted to do, that activity became her new, and far more healthy,
organizing principle. Most of all, she developed an awareness of how
to work within herself, making the most of her abilities, while
learning how to work around her limitations.

Case 4: Penny
Penny McBride’s parents came to see me after Penny’s fifth-grade
teacher suggested she get a psychiatric evaluation. “I don’t know
what to think,” her mother said at our first appointment. Her hands
were interlocked at the tips of her fingers and she was looking down
at them as she spoke. “I hate to think that we’ve done anything
wrong.”
“Coming to see me doesn’t mean that you’ve done something
wrong,” I said, noting to myself that it is still the case, although much
less so than it was twenty or thirty years ago, that consulting a
psychiatrist about your child carries a stigma in many people’s
minds. “What is going on with Penny?”
“She’s falling behind,” her father said. “That’s all. She’s a good girl.
Never any trouble.”
“She just daydreams all the time,” her mother picked up. “Ever
since I can remember, she’s been my little dreamer, my faraway child
—”
“Tell him about the stories,” the father interrupted.
“She’s my youngest, my baby,” Mrs. McBride continued, holding
one finger up to her husband as if to say, Just one minute. “We had
four children two years apart and then six years later Penny
appeared. I had more time for her than I did for the others. She was
easier because she was quieter, more like me, I guess, than the four
boys. I loved the boys.” She paused and looked out my third-floor
window at the trees beyond, seeming for a moment to be lost in
remembrance of her sons. Then she clicked back into the room. “But
Penny and I were more tuned in to each other from the start, I think.
When you’ve had four boys and never had a girl, well, you forget
what being a girl is all about almost, and when Penny arrived,
nothing against you, Joe, or the boys, but it was as if a compatriot
had joined my life. I do not mean that we were enmeshed or
entangled or whatever the psychological term is for an overinvolved

When you’ve had four boys and never had a girl, well, you forget
what being a girl is all about almost, and when Penny arrived,
nothing against you, Joe, or the boys, but it was as if a compatriot
had joined my life. I do not mean that we were enmeshed or
entangled or whatever the psychological term is for an overinvolved

mother, because we were not—believe me, we weren’t. But in a house
full of males, it was good to balance things for me a bit. Anyway, the
stories Joe was referring to are stories Penny and I made up. We
called them the Faraway Stories, about children who lived in
Faraway Land. The name came to me when I was telling Penny a
story when she was three and the look in her eyes was so faraway. I
wanted to come join her wherever she was, so I said let’s go to a
faraway land. And that’s where the stories started.”
“She liked the stories?” I asked.
“Oh, she loved them. I could calm her down almost anytime with a
story. Not that she got upset very often.”
“Could she add to the stories?” I asked. “Make things up?” A crude
assessment of imaginative and linguistic ability is the capacity to add
on to a story line.
“She was better at listening,” her mother said. “I could tell story
after story and she would sit next to me rocking and smiling. If I
asked her a question, it would become clear some of the story had
passed right by her. Because she was so far away, I’d tell myself. But I
didn’t know what I meant by that. It was just a feeling I had.”
“It sounds like you were well attuned to her,” I said.
“But now I think she wasn’t getting it at all. She did love to listen,
though.” Regret began to fill Mrs. McBride’s voice. “Why didn’t I get
some help sooner?”
Joe McBride, a ruddy-faced man smartly dressed in a business suit
and a muted purple and turquoise tie, put his arm around his wife as
she started to cry. Sitting together on my office couch, they looked
frightened and embarrassed. “What Polly means,” Joe said, “is that
we had no idea anything was wrong. Penny was a quiet little girl,
that’s all.”

“I understand,” I said. “Try to go easy on yourselves. You’re
obviously concerned parents. It was hard for you to come here at all.
Let’s see if I can’t make it worth your while.”
Wearing a red wool sweater, jeans, and her slightly graying blond
hair up in a bandanna, Polly looked like she’d come directly from a
hike with her children. She was a casual contrast to her more
packaged-for-the-public husband. “It’s a bit of a shock to the system
to hear your daughter needs to see a psychiatrist,” she said, wiping
her eyes not with the handkerchief her husband offered her but with
the first knuckle of each hand.
As we began to get more history—and the key to making a
diagnosis in this complicated field is through the story of the child’s
life, rather than through complicated tests—what emerged was a
picture of an intelligent girl who had some language and attentional
problems.
Problems in the development of language can occur at a number of
levels and in a number of ways. One can have difficulty with input or
with output. Input problems, or what are called receptive language
problems, can affect both what you take in and what you are able to
put out, because what you put out is dependent on what you were
able to take in. Output problems, or what are called expressive
language problems, can affect what you are able to write or speak as
well as what you are able to conceptualize within your brain.

problems, can affect both what you take in and what you are able to
put out, because what you put out is dependent on what you were
able to take in. Output problems, or what are called expressive
language problems, can affect what you are able to write or speak as
well as what you are able to conceptualize within your brain.
Although a full discussion of learning and language problems,
including dyslexia, is well beyond the scope of this book, we cannot
discuss ADD without some mention of language problems—and
learning disabilities in general—since they so often coexist with ADD,
each usually making the other worse. In addition, we will have to
touch on other neurological problems that can mimic or exacerbate
ADD, from the obvious, such as hearing impairment,
nearsightedness, or a nerve problem that affects articulation, to the
more subtle aphasias and memory problems and seizure disorders.

I asked Polly if Penny were late in learning to talk. Although
developmental milestones, as these moments of specific achievement
are referred to, are not etched in stone, they do give a quick reference
point as to whether it is a developmental delay worth investigating.
You also have to be sure you and the parent have the same definition
of “early” or “late.” Some parents consider their child late if he or she
cannot recite Shakespeare by ten months, while others consider no
language at all until age three just fine, if not a relief.
“Yes, she was,” Polly said. “Her first words didn’t come until about
twenty-two months, and little sentences didn’t come until she was
three. Our pediatrician suggested that I read to her a lot and make up
stories together. That’s where the Faraway Stories came from.”
“She liked them?” I asked.
“She loved them. That’s what was so touching. Even though I knew
she wasn’t getting it all, she’d sit still and ask to hear more stories.
And if I stopped in the middle, she’d pull on my arm and say, ‘I want
more!’ ”
“Could she play with words at all?” I asked.
“What do you mean?” Polly responded.
“You know, make rhymes, repeat rhymes, make up nonsense
words—”
Polly, who was leaning forward eagerly, interrupted to answer.
“She couldn’t do rhymes exactly. But she made up words all the time.
She couldn’t think of the right word, so she’d make one up. Instead of
saying we’re going to the airport, she’d say we’re going to the plane
place. Or instead of birthday present, she’d say box-day thing.”
“You remember these well,” I said. “What would you do when she
said them?”

“I would correct her. Shouldn’t I have?”
“No, it doesn’t matter at all. I’m just trying to get a sense of what
this was like for her emotionally.”
“She would say the new phrase I told her. I didn’t want her to think
she was stupid.”
“Did you think she was stupid?” I asked.
“No, not at all,” Polly said emphatically. “If I’d thought she was
stupid, I probably wouldn’t have corrected her so easily. But I knew
she was smart and would want to get the right word. Plus, I thought
her ability to improvise and make words up proved she was smart.”
“You’re right,” I said. “It sounds like her problem was in finding
the right word in her storage bin, so to speak. Or in finding the right
storage bin. Or in remembering the word. Or in transporting the
word from the storage bin to her mouth.”
“This sounds pretty complicated,” Polly said.
“Well, it is,” I said. “But that’s really good news that it’s

“You’re right,” I said. “It sounds like her problem was in finding
the right word in her storage bin, so to speak. Or in finding the right
storage bin. Or in remembering the word. Or in transporting the
word from the storage bin to her mouth.”
“This sounds pretty complicated,” Polly said.
“Well, it is,” I said. “But that’s really good news that it’s
complicated, and that we know that it’s complicated. Not so long ago
we seemed to think all this was very simple. You were either smart or
you were stupid. Oh, we had some ultra categories like genius and
moron, but it was all based on a really simpleminded notion of
intelligence. Smart versus stupid. And that was the basic ball game.
But lately we’ve been finding out how complicated intelligence and
learning really are. For example, Mel Levine, one of the great figures
in the world of learning problems, talks about seven kinds of
memory, and you can have a problem with any one of them that can
interfere with learning. That’s what I was referring to when I was
talking about getting words out of the storage bins. I just wanted to
think of some analogy. You get what I mean?”
“Yes, I do, and it’s exciting,” Polly said.

“What about in school?” I asked. “What happened then?”
“She fell behind in reading from the start,” Joe said a little glumly.
“That’s not quite true, honey,” Polly said, gently containing her
annoyance with his performance-appraisal approach. “She was more
interested in books than any of the kids. She just couldn’t
comprehend them all. But she always wanted me to read to her and
she still likes to hear the Faraway Stories even to this day.”
“What about the daydreaming?” I asked.
Polly handed me a stack of papers. “These are teacher reports
going back to first grade. You’ll see they all say about the same thing.
‘Tunes out.’ ‘Seems shy.’ ‘Can’t pay attention without frequent
reminders.’ One of the teachers even wondered if she might be
depressed, she seemed so quiet all the time. But it wasn’t until this
year that Becky Truesdale—”
“Who?” I interrupted.
“Becky Truesdale, her fifth-grade teacher. She was the first to
bring up the possibility of ADD or a learning disorder. I have to
admit I’d never even heard of ADD. I only knew about hyperactivity
in boys. But Becky says girls can get it and sometimes there’s no
hyperactivity, just tuning out.”
“Becky’s right,” I said. “Girls can have ADD as well as boys.
Hyperactivity is the old name for the syndrome. More recently, the
label ADD was invented to focus on the symptom of attention
inconsistency these kids have. A lot of girls who have it never get
diagnosed. Instead, they’re just thought of as shy or quiet or even
depressed, like Penny.” In giving the McBrides an overview of the
ADD syndrome, I stressed that ADD was often found in particularly
creative, intuitive children. “Lots of kids who have ADD also have
something else, something we don’t have a name for, something

diagnosed. Instead, they’re just thought of as shy or quiet or even
depressed, like Penny.” In giving the McBrides an overview of the
ADD syndrome, I stressed that ADD was often found in particularly
creative, intuitive children. “Lots of kids who have ADD also have
something else, something we don’t have a name for, something

good. They can be highly imaginative and empathic, closely attuned
to the moods and thoughts of the people around them, even as they
are missing most of the words that are being said. The key is to make
the diagnosis early before these kids start getting stuck in school with
all kinds of pejorative labels. With some help, they can really
blossom.”
I took a few minutes to read through the teacher comments, which,
as Polly had told me, were full of descriptions of absentmindedness
or daydreaminess or unfinished work. The comments reminded me
of a term Priscilla Vail uses in reference to children who don’t quite
fit any mold exactly: conundrum kids.
“Would you like to meet Penny?” Polly asked.
“Of course,” I said. “But why don’t I go to her. Often kids with ADD
can focus very well in the one-on-one situation of the doctor’s office.
In here there is structure, and novelty, both of which drastically
reduce ADD symptoms. Even the fear a child sometimes feels in a
doctor’s office can increase concentration, and so mask the ADD
symptoms. That’s why it can be so easy for a pediatrician to miss the
diagnosis. The symptoms just aren’t there in the office. In a
classroom you get a truer picture. So may I visit?”
Polly and Joe McBride enthusiastically agreed and made
arrangements with Becky Truesdale. Schools are usually quite
receptive to this kind of visit. They are eager to share what they
know. What they have to say is usually of great value.
I slipped quietly into the classroom during what looked like math
period and took an empty chair along the bookshelves in one corner
of the room. Another teacher who had guided me to the classroom
pointed Penny out before she left. I watched her, trying not to stare.
She was a cute little brown-haired girl with a ponytail, wearing a
yellow dress and Nike sneakers. Her desk was where I’m sure she
wanted it to be: at the back of the room, right next to a window.

Now I should put in a word here about windows and schools and
ADD. One can easily get the idea from a school that it thinks
windows are the devil’s own work, placed in schoolrooms as a means
of temptation, pure and simple. The good children look away from
windows, while the bad cannot resist their transparent allure, free
passage to the sky and trees and daydreams beyond.
People with ADD do look out windows. They do not stay on track.
They stray. But they also see new things or find new ways to see old
things. They are not just the tuned-out of this world; they are also
tuned in, often to the fresh and the new. They are often the inventors
and the innovators, the movers and the doers. Good Do-Bees they
may not always be, but we should be wise enough not to force them
into a mold they’ll never fit.
But what of these devilish windows? Is it so bad—a sure mark of
educational decline—to look out them? I wonder instead if it isn’t the
duller child who does not look out windows.
Penny’s eye certainly found its way there. As she sat, her right
cheek comfortably contained in the palm of her right hand, the
fingers of her left hand tapped soundlessly on the wooden desk while

educational decline—to look out them? I wonder instead if it isn’t the
duller child who does not look out windows.
Penny’s eye certainly found its way there. As she sat, her right
cheek comfortably contained in the palm of her right hand, the
fingers of her left hand tapped soundlessly on the wooden desk while
she gazed out the window. I looked to see what she saw, but I could
see only sky and an ascending branch of a nearby tree. That’s one
thing about window-staring: you can never really tell what the other
person is seeing out there.
Every now and then, usually in response to a noise of some sort,
Penny would look toward the blackboard and the numbers that were
accumulating. Today’s board was sprouting fractions by the minute.
Penny must have seen something in them because she’d wrinkle her
brow now and again when she’d look at them. She didn’t seem
troubled, just serenely uncomprehending. Then she’d brush back her
hair, and, as if following the trail of a speck of dust, slowly turn her
head back to the window. She made no noise. She caused no
disturbance whatever. If anything, her serenity lent a calming

influence to the classroom. It was easy to imagine how she could go
unnoticed over the years.
I introduced myself to her after class, as there was a break for
recess. Her parents had told her I’d be coming. “Hello, Dr.
Hallowell,” she said with a big smile. “My mom said you’re a nice
man.”
“Well, you have a nice mom,” I said. “Did she tell you anything
else?”
“I don’t think so,” Penny said, her face contorting into a there’ssomething-I’m-supposed-to-remember-but-I-can’t look.
“That’s OK,” I said. “Do you want to get outside for recess?”
“Mom said you might want to talk to me,” Penny said.
“Just for a second. Your mom and dad came to see me to ask if I
could help out with how things go for you in school and stuff. Do you
like school?”
“Oh, yes,” Penny said enthusiastically.
“What do you like about it?” I asked.
“I like the teacher and I like the other kids, and I like the walk to
get here from home and I like the time to sit and listen—”
“What do you listen to?” I asked.
“Oh, to anything,” Penny said. “Mostly my own thoughts. I like to
make up stories in my head. Mom and I have a kind of game—”
“She told me about it,” I said. “Sounds like fun. Is that what you
were doing during math class this morning?”

“Yes,” she said. “I was making one up about fat old men who
looked like sixes and funny old women who looked like nines and
they went dancing together and turned into eights.”
“That’s great, Penny,” I said. “Do you think the eights will get back
to sixes and nines?”
“Maybe,” she said, pulling at the yellow-spangled stretch band
around her ponytail. “I was actually going to have them lie down and
become binoculars that could see very far away.”
“All the way to Faraway Land,” I said.
“Yes,” she said, blushing a little bit that I knew the name of the
place in the stories.
“Is there anything you don’t like about school?” I asked.
Penny looked down at her sneakers. “I’m behind all the time. I
don’t get the homework.”
“Maybe we can find you some help with that,” I said. “Recess is
almost over, I bet. Maybe we could meet sometime later when you’re
not in school.”
“Sure,” Penny said. “But you’ll have to speak to my mom. She
makes all my appointments.”
“Of course,” I said. “Great meeting you, Penny. See you later.”
Becky Truesdale was a young teacher just out of a teaching

“Maybe we can find you some help with that,” I said. “Recess is
almost over, I bet. Maybe we could meet sometime later when you’re
not in school.”
“Sure,” Penny said. “But you’ll have to speak to my mom. She
makes all my appointments.”
“Of course,” I said. “Great meeting you, Penny. See you later.”
Becky Truesdale was a young teacher just out of a teaching
internship at a private school near Boston. She knew a lot about ADD
and learning disabilities. “I’m so glad you could come,” she said to
me. “I didn’t want to call on Penny in class so you could see how she
is when she’s left alone. She’s really smart, you know.”

“Mmm,” I said, “and she seems happy, at least today.” I thought I
heard a trace of a southern accent in Becky’s words. “Are you from
the South?” I asked, the impulsivity of my own ADD overcoming the
tact and sequentiality I should have given the exchange.
“Why, yes,” Becky said, not annoyed by my change of subject. “I
grew up in Charleston until my family moved to Maine.”
“Quite a change.”
“That’s for sure. And you?”
“I actually lived for a few years in Charleston myself,” I said. “As a
kid.” We paused. “How long have you known Penny?” I asked.
“Just since the beginning of the school year. Six weeks. Not long
enough to know her well, but long enough to like her. She reminds
me of a young artist or something, sitting in the back daydreaming.”
“Do you think she’s depressed?” I asked.
“No,” Becky said with a laugh. “Far from it. She brightens right up
whenever you talk to her. The other kids like her. Even when she
stands off, they don’t pick on her. It’s as if they accept that that’s just
her way.”
“What is your main concern about her?” I asked.
“That she really isn’t with us,” Becky said without hesitation. “And
I’m afraid that the further she goes in school the more of a problem
that will become. Even in this class she misses a lot, but somehow
she compensates. Still, I know she could be learning more.”
Becky and I talked until the end of recess. I thanked her for her
help and said goodbye, promising to stay in touch.

There was a list of conditions in my mind that could explain
Penny’s situation. After I met with Penny in person again, met with
her parents once more, and got some neuropsychological testing
done, that list had narrowed to two: attention deficit disorder
without hyperactivity and both expressive and receptive language
disabilities.
ADD exacerbates learning problems in the same way that
nearsightedness does: you can’t focus as well as you should, so you
are not able to use the talents you have to the fullest. The first step in
treatment is to get glasses, or treat the ADD, and then reassess the
extent of the residual learning disability.
Just making the diagnosis, giving a medical name with a rational
treatment to what Penny’s parents had thought was an immutable
quirk of temperament, helped a lot. Once everybody understood
what was going on, we started medication. While the medication by
itself would not be sufficient treatment, the results in this instance
were dramatic and quick.
There are several medications used in the treatment of ADD. They
all help the individual to focus better. In a sense, they act like
internal eyeglasses, increasing the brain’s ability to focus on one task
over time while filtering out competing stimuli or distractions.
Of the various medications available at the time, we chose
Norpramin for Penny. Norpramin is in the class of medications

all help the individual to focus better. In a sense, they act like
internal eyeglasses, increasing the brain’s ability to focus on one task
over time while filtering out competing stimuli or distractions.
Of the various medications available at the time, we chose
Norpramin for Penny. Norpramin is in the class of medications
referred to as the tricyclic antidepressants. Although medications in
this group are called antidepressants, they have many other uses
than for the treatment of depression, including the treatment of
ADD, both in children and adults. The most common other group of
medications used to treat ADD are the stimulants. Since the original
publication of Driven to Distraction, great strides have been made in
long-acting stimulants such as Concerta and Adderall. Today they
would be our first choice, although used properly, both groups are
extremely safe and effective.

Within a few days of Penny’s starting medication, her parents as
well as Becky were on the phone to me. They were all amazed. She
was tuned in in class, focused on the work at hand, participating
actively and creatively. Most of all, she was really enjoying school,
and in ways she had not enjoyed it before. She was enjoying learning.
The medication’s only side effect in Penny’s case was mild dry
mouth, caused by the anticholinergic property of the tricyclics (that
is, they block the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, which mediates
various bodily functions, including salivation) as happens with many
over-the-counter cold remedies. This is tolerable and may be
counteracted with a Life Saver or other lozenge. The medication did
not take anything away from Penny; she could still daydream when
she wanted to.
While this was only the beginning of the treatment, it was in many
ways the most moving part for everyone, including me. As Penny’s
mother put it to me in one of our follow-up visits, “It’s as if a veil has
been lifted from Penny’s eyes. She can see us and we can see her.
She’s still my dreamer, but now it’s on purpose that she dreams.”

2

“I SANG IN MY CHAINS
LIKE THE SEA”

THE CHILD WITH ADD
Our first knowledge of attention deficit disorder came from children,
before we knew that the syndrome continued into adulthood. ADD is
now one of the conditions within the field of childhood development
about which we know a great deal. A conservative estimate would be
that 5 percent of school-age children have ADD, and yet it remains
poorly understood by the general public, often going unrecognized or
misdiagnosed. The hallmark symptoms of ADD—distractibility,
impulsivity, and high activity—are so commonly associated with
children in general that the diagnosis is often not considered. A child
with undiagnosed ADD is thought to be “just being a child,” only
more so. It wouldn’t occur to anyone that the “more so” was a tip-off
to a medical diagnosis unless they knew something about that
diagnosis in advance.
Where does the “more so” leave off and the neurological syndrome
of ADD begin? How can we tell a spoiled child from an ADD child?
How can we tell a child with emotional problems from a child with
ADD? One must look carefully at the child’s individual history. The
diagnosis rests primarily upon the history.
There are also psychological tests that can provide additional
evidence in making a diagnosis. Certain subtests of the WISC
(Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children)—a standard test for
children—may suggest ADD. Typically, the subscores for digit span,
arithmetic, and coding are low in ADD. Additionally, there is often a
wide split between what is called the verbal subscore and what is
called the performance subscore. There are other tests that attempt
to assess attention and impulsivity, but it should be stressed there is
no one definitive “test” for ADD. The most reliable diagnostic tool is
the individual’s history as elicited from the child, from parents, and,
very importantly, from teacher reports.
There is no clear line of demarcation between ADD and normal
behavior. Rather, one must make a judgment based on a comparison
of the individual child to his or her peer group. If he or she stands

out as markedly more distractible, impulsive, and restless, and if
there is no other apparent cause for this behavior, such as a
disruption of the family or substance abuse or depression or other
medical condition, then the diagnosis of ADD can be entertained.
However, only a professional who has experience in working with
ADD should make the diagnosis.
The two most common errors in the diagnostic process are missing
the diagnosis or making the diagnosis too often.
The most common reason for missing the diagnosis is not knowing
about ADD in the first place. Not every teacher, not every
psychologist, not every medical doctor knows about ADD.
Even professionals who know about ADD can miss the diagnosis if
they rely too heavily on psychological testing. While psychological
testing can be very helpful, it is not definitive. Children who have
ADD can appear not to have it when psychologically tested. This is
because the structure, novelty, and motivation associated with the
testing procedure can effectively, for the moment, “treat” the child’s
ADD. The child may be focused by the one-on-one structure of the
testing, focused by the novelty of the situation, and be so motivated
to “do well” that the motivation overides the ADD. For these reasons,
the clinical data—the teachers’ reports, the parents’ reports, the

testing procedure can effectively, for the moment, “treat” the child’s
ADD. The child may be focused by the one-on-one structure of the
testing, focused by the novelty of the situation, and be so motivated
to “do well” that the motivation overides the ADD. For these reasons,
the clinical data—the teachers’ reports, the parents’ reports, the
evidence of human eyes and ears over time—must take precedence
over the data garnered through psychological testing.
The second-most-common error in the diagnostic process is the
reverse of the first. It is overcalling ADD, seeing it everywhere. A
careful evaluation must take into account a number of conditions
that can look just like ADD. Some of these, like hyperthyroidism,
require testing by a physician in order to be ruled out.
In addition to making sure that no other medical condition is
causing the symptoms, one must recognize that ADD is a
comparative diagnosis. It depends not just upon the presence of

symptoms but upon the intensity and duration of those symptoms.
Most children are distractible, impulsive, and restless some of the
time. The vast majority of children do not have ADD, and one must
be very careful not to make the diagnosis so easily that it loses
meaning or becomes a fad.
For those children who do, in fact, have ADD, it is of great
importance that the diagnosis be made as early as possible so as to
minimize the damage to self-esteem that usually occurs when these
children are misunderstood and labeled lazy or defiant or odd or bad.
The life of a child, and his or her family, with undiagnosed ADD is a
life full of unnecessary struggle, accusation, guilt, recrimination,
underachievement, and sadness. The sooner the diagnosis can be
made, the sooner this unnecessary pain can cease. While diagnosis
and treatment do not put an end to the difficulties ADD creates in
the child’s life, they at least allow for those difficulties to be known
for what they are.
We all want our children to develop confidence, a solid sense of
self-esteem that can sustain them over time. It is an invisible but
decisive process, the weaving of self-esteem, drawing in threads of
experience every day, threads that will last a lifetime. If those threads
are made of humiliation, failure, and embarrassment, then the cloth
will not be worn with much comfort. We should do everything we can
to see to it that the threads are made of success, confidence, and a
sense of the fairness of things. Understanding early on that a child
has a learning disorder, such as ADD, is one way to help reach that
goal.
Throughout history there have been many great men and women
who have had various learning disabilities that they managed to
overcome. Although it can’t be proved he had it, Mozart would be a
good example of a person with ADD: impatient, impulsive,
distractible, energetic, emotionally needy, creative, innovative,
irreverent, and a maverick. Structure is one of the hallmarks of the
treatment of ADD, and the tight forms within which Mozart worked

overcome. Although it can’t be proved he had it, Mozart would be a
good example of a person with ADD: impatient, impulsive,
distractible, energetic, emotionally needy, creative, innovative,
irreverent, and a maverick. Structure is one of the hallmarks of the
treatment of ADD, and the tight forms within which Mozart worked

show how beautifully structure can capture the dart-here, dart-there
genius of the ADD mind. In fact, there is a powerfully positive aspect
to ADD, and learning disorders in general, a positive aspect that is as
yet ill defined. You might describe many with ADD as having a
“special something,” a hard-to-pin-down yet undeniable potential. If
that potential can be tapped, the results can be spectacular. Albert
Einstein, Edgar Allan Poe, George Bernard Shaw, and Salvador Dali
were all expelled from school, and Thomas Edison was at the bottom
of his class. Abraham Lincoln and Henry Ford were pronounced by
their teachers to show no promise. The novelist John Irving nearly
flunked out of high school because of an undiagnosed learning
disability. There is a long, long list of people who achieved greatness
in adult life after performing abysmally in school due to undiagnosed
learning disabilities. Unfortunately, there is a longer list of those
people whose spirits were broken in school, who therefore never got
the chance to realize their potential.
With that as introduction, let me take you now into the world of
Maxwell McCarthy.
When Maxwell was born, his mother held him in her arms and
cried tears of joy. He was the son Sylvia and Patrick McCarthy had
wished for after their two daughters. Maxwell stared up at his mom
as his dad leaned across the pillows and drew little circles with his
forefinger on Maxwell’s wrinkled forehead.
“He looks like my father,” Patrick said.
“You can’t tell this soon, silly.”
“I just have a feeling,” Patrick replied. His father, Maxwell
McCarthy, after whom this new Maxwell was named, had been a
prominent Boston lawyer, the rod and staff of Patrick’s life, his hero
and his guide. The values of intellectual achievement and rock-solid
integrity combined with a hard-drinking, convivial bonhomie made

the senior Maxwell an almost legendary figure. As Patrick looked
down at his son now, he saw some of his old man in him. The large
head size he concluded meant brains. The twinkle in the baby’s eyes
meant joie de vivre. And the integrity would come from a disciplined
upbringing. A gurgling, swaddled package now, Maxwell McCarthy
was destined for great things.
Sylvia’s fantasies drifted more toward the simple but boundless joy
of holding this little baby. Oh, she had thought about his future
before he was born. She hoped for him what she hoped for her other
children, that he could have the advantages she hadn’t had when she
was growing up. Her family had been torn apart by mental illness,
depression, and alcoholism. She had worked her way through law
school, where she met Patrick, and she was now juggling part-time
legal work with being a mother of—now—three. In the process, she’d
lost all contact with her family, and she was never far from the
sadness of that. As she looked down at Maxwell, she thought, We will
be good to you, beautiful one.
As an infant and toddler, Max never liked to be left alone. He was
gregarious and active. When he learned how to walk, it was almost
impossible to childproof the house, Max was so fast. Cute as he was,

sadness of that. As she looked down at Maxwell, she thought, We will
be good to you, beautiful one.
As an infant and toddler, Max never liked to be left alone. He was
gregarious and active. When he learned how to walk, it was almost
impossible to childproof the house, Max was so fast. Cute as he was,
it was exhausting to take care of him. As one of his babysitters said,
somewhat vengefully, after a long night with Max, “You have a very
high-maintenance baby.”
By the time he was four, young Max had a nickname, “Mad Max.”
“How shall I put it to you?” said Max’s day-care provider to Sylvia
and Patrick. “He is very enthusiastic.”
“You can be straight with us,” Patrick said sternly, for the moment
forgetting he was surrounded by teddy bears, little bunnies, and
storybooks, not leather-bound tomes.
“Well, it’s just that he likes to do so many things, he’s all over the
place. The minute he starts one thing he’s into another. He’s a bundle

of joy, but he also can be very disruptive in the group.”
In the car on the way home Patrick said, “What Miss Rebecca of
Sunnybrook Farm was trying to tell us is that Max is a brat.”
“She was not,” said Sylvia. “He’s just rambunctious, like you used
to be.”
“I was not. I had discipline. Standards. Max has no standards.”
“He’s only four, for crying out loud,” Sylvia said. “Can’t you let him
be a little boy?”
“Sure. Just not a spoiled little boy.”
“Oh. And I suppose his behavior is all my fault,” said Sylvia.
“I didn’t say that,” Patrick replied.
“No, you didn’t say that, but since I’m home twice as much as you,
you’ve made it pretty clear to me who has primary responsibility for
the kids. But Pat, boys need dads.”
“Oh, so it’s my fault now. Clever way of turning it around.” They
drove on in silence.
At age six Max entered the first grade at Meadow Glen, a coed
private school. Things went all right at first, but then one day, as the
kids were on the floor doing projects in pairs, Max suddenly took his
jar of paint, smashed it on the floor, kicked the project he and his
partner were making across the room, and started punching himself
in the face. His teacher took him outside to calm down while the coteacher stayed with the other children. “What happened in there?”
his teacher asked Max.
“Everything I make breaks,” he said, tears beading down his
cheeks.

“That’s not true,” his teacher said. “Your project was looking very
good.”
“It was not,” Max said. “It sucked.”
“Max, you know we can’t talk like that here.”
“I know,” Max said sadly. “I need more discipline and better
standards.”
Later, at the request of the teacher, some testing was done on Max,
but as it turned out it was only intelligence-testing. Max had a fullscale IQ of 145, with a ten-point split between performance and
verbal. “You see? He’s plenty smart,” Max’s dad would say. “What he
needs is to buckle down.”
Through the early years Max’s grades were fine. The comments on
his report cards, however, were upsetting, comments such as
“Despite my best efforts, I cannot persuade Max to pay attention
consistently,” or “Although he doesn’t mean to be, Max is a constant
disruption in class,” or “His social adjustment lags behind,” or “He is
so obviously bright—but he is a born daydreamer.”
As for Max himself, he felt confused. He tried to do what he was
told, like sit still or pay attention or keep his hands to himself, but he
found that in spite of his best efforts he couldn’t do these things. So

disruption in class,” or “His social adjustment lags behind,” or “He is
so obviously bright—but he is a born daydreamer.”
As for Max himself, he felt confused. He tried to do what he was
told, like sit still or pay attention or keep his hands to himself, but he
found that in spite of his best efforts he couldn’t do these things. So
he kept getting into trouble. He hated his nickname at home, Mad
Max, but whenever he complained about it, his sisters teased him,
and when they teased him, he hit them, and when he hit them, he got
in trouble. He didn’t know what to do.
“I don’t know what to do with you,” his father said one day.
“Why don’t you send me back to the dealership like you did with
the Fiat? Maybe they have a lemon law for kids.” He had learned
about the lemon law through listening to many conversations
between his parents.

“Oh, Max,” his father said, trying to give him a hug, “we wouldn’t
trade you for anything. We love you.”
“Then how come,” Max asked, pulling away, “how come you said to
Mom that all the problems in this family are because of me?”
“I never said that, Max.”
“Yes, Dad, you did,” Max said softly.
“Well, I didn’t mean it if I did. It’s just that we need a game plan
for you, like when we watch the Patriots I tell you about the game
plan. What kind of game plan can we come up with to keep you out
of trouble?”
“Well, Dad, you say it’s up to the coach to come up with a game
plan that works, and if he can’t do that they should fire the coach.
You’re the coach around here, aren’t you Dad, you and Mom?”
“Yes, son, we are. But we can’t be fired. And we need your help.”
“I’ll try harder,” Max said. He was nine years old at the time. That
night he wrote on a piece of paper, “I wish I was dead,” then
crumpled it up and threw it in the wastebasket.
His life, however, was not all gloom. For one thing, he was, as his
second-grade teacher put it, “chock full of spunk.” And, as that same
teacher said, he was cute as a button. He was smart, no doubt about
that, and he did love to get into things. He could turn a telephone
booth into a playground and a telephone book into a novel. His
father thought Max was more creative than just about anyone he’d
ever met; he just wished he could help Max contain it.
What Max couldn’t do was behave. Conform. Sit still. Raise his
hand. And he didn’t know why he couldn’t. Because there was no
explanation, he began to believe the worst: that he was bad, a
spaceshot, a dingbat, a functional retard, all names he’d been called.

When he asked his mother what a functional retard meant, she asked
him where he’d heard the term.
“I read it in a book,” Max said, lying.
“What book?” his mother asked.
“Just a book. What does it matter what book? Do you think I keep
records?”
“No, Max, I just wondered if maybe someone called you that and
you don’t want to tell me who.” As soon as she said it, his mother
realized her mistake, but the words were out and irretrievable. “Max,
it doesn’t mean anything,” his mother hurried to add as she tried to
hug him.
“Let me go,” he said.
“Max, it means nothing. Whoever said it is stupid.”
“Like Dad?” Max said, staring into his mother’s eyes through tears.
By the sixth grade, Max’s grades became erratic, ranging from the
best in the class to barely passing. “How is it,” one of his teachers
asked him, “that one week you can be one of the best students I’ve
ever had and the next week act as if you weren’t even in the room?”

“Like Dad?” Max said, staring into his mother’s eyes through tears.
By the sixth grade, Max’s grades became erratic, ranging from the
best in the class to barely passing. “How is it,” one of his teachers
asked him, “that one week you can be one of the best students I’ve
ever had and the next week act as if you weren’t even in the room?”
“I don’t know,” said Max glumly, by now getting used to this line of
questioning. “I guess I’ve got a funny brain.”
“You’ve got a very good brain,” the teacher responded.
“A brain is only a brain,” said Max philosophically, “but a good
person is hard to find.”
The teacher looked astonished at this precocious remark,
astonished and perplexed, which Max picked up on. “Don’t try and

figure me out,” Max said with resignation in his voice. “I just need
more discipline. I’ll try harder.”
Later, at a parent-teacher conference one of the teachers offered
this description: “Watching Max sit at his desk in class is like
watching a kind of ballet. A leg will come up, then an arm will arch
around it, and then a foot will appear as the head disappears from
sight. This is often followed by a crash. Then, often, a swear. You
know, he’s so hard on himself it’s hard for me to come down on him.”
Max’s parents listened, felt guilty, and sighed.
Although Max thought quite poorly of himself by now, his spunk
and pride kept him from talking with anyone about it. However, he
did have conversations with himself. Sometimes he would beat up on
himself. “You’re bad, bad, bad,” he would say. “Why don’t you
change?” Then he would make a list of resolutions. “Study harder. Sit
still. Get homework done on time. Don’t do things that make Mom
and Dad worry. Keep your hands to yourself.”
Brought up Catholic, sometimes he talked to God. “Why did you
make me so different?” he would ask.
And other times, the best times, he would wander unperturbed
with his thoughts, from one image or idea to the next, so that big
chunks of time could pass without his even noticing it. Often this
happened when he was reading a book. He would start on page 1,
and by the time he was in the middle of page 3, he would be off in
fantasy on a moonwalk or winning a football game with a rushing
touchdown in the last minute. The daydream could go on for a half
hour or so as Max sat staring at page 3. This was one of his greatest
pleasures, but also a real obstacle to getting his homework in on
time.
Although Max had friends, he at times annoyed them by what they
took to be his selfishness. As he got older, he found it hard to follow
the conversation in a group of friends and so he stared off, blankly.

“Hey, what’s with you, McCarthy?” his friends said. “You on drugs or
something?”
But because of his basically cheerful personality—he had learned
how to put up a good front—and because his raw intelligence could
carry him academically, Max avoided social or academic catastrophe.
By ninth grade his family had grown accustomed to him as Mad
Max; instead of fighting back, he took the teasing and added to it by
making fun of himself, tripping over his feet intentionally or pointing
to his head and saying, “Crazy.” His mother moved his room to the
basement. “At least the mess can be contained in one place out of
sight,” she said. “Since you’re constitutionally incapable of
straightening your room, at least we can move you to the least
offensive spot.” That suited Max just fine.

to his head and saying, “Crazy.” His mother moved his room to the
basement. “At least the mess can be contained in one place out of
sight,” she said. “Since you’re constitutionally incapable of
straightening your room, at least we can move you to the least
offensive spot.” That suited Max just fine.
In contrast to the time he drew circles on his son’s forehead when
he looked at him as a baby in the hospital, Max’s father now just
hoped and prayed that Max could survive in this cruel world, that he
would find some niche for himself where his creativity and good
nature were rewarded and his gargantuan carelessness and
irresponsibility not get him fired. When his mother looked at him
now, she thought of him as her lovable genius-goof. At times she felt
very guilty at not having been able to straighten Max out, but after
three children and more professional compromises than she cared to
think of, she was trying to learn to go easy on herself. Indeed, she felt
relief that the family had not been destroyed by the problems Max
had caused earlier on.
This period of relative calm and accommodation ended as Max
encountered the greater stimulations the world of high school
offered. He felt an internal restlessness that could only be soothed by
engaging in some external situation of equally high energy.
He began to find release in athletics, becoming a fanatical longdistance runner and wrestler. He talked about “the pleasure in the

pain of the long-distance run” and the mental relief, the feeling of
“absolute psychic clarity” in the last half mile. He was also an
excellent wrestler. He was especially good at the move at the start of
a period when you explode out of your opponent’s grasp. Here at last
was a place where he could legitimately go crazy, where at last he
could release all the energy he had stored in his cells and slash
through the bonds of good behavior as if escaping from a briar patch.
In wrestling Max could break free. He also loved the agony of getting
down to the proper weight for a meet. “I hate it, of course,” he would
say, “but I also love it. It focuses my mind on one thing, one goal.”
But, as relatively adaptive as his sports were, he also began to flirt
with danger. He began experimenting with drugs, particularly
cocaine, which he noticed calmed him and helped him focus. He was
always on the go. He had more girlfriends than he could keep
straight. All this left him little time for studying. He continued to
play a game he called “chicken,” walking into exams totally
unprepared and seeing if he could fake his way through. He began to
discover that he couldn’t do this as well as he had in grade school.
In a part of his being, he knew he was courting disaster. On his
way out the door one day, he casually said to his mother, “You know,
Mom, I’m a walking time bomb.”
Thinking he was joking, she answered with a laugh, “At least
you’re not a dud.” The family had learned long ago to turn Max’s selfdeprecatory remarks into jokes. They weren’t unfeeling; they just
didn’t know what else to do.
What happened next could have happened in many different ways.
Or, it might not have happened at all. There are many adult Maxes
out there who have managed not to trip and fall. They simply live
frenetic lives, a whirligig of high stimulation and often high
achievement, with an abiding sense that their world is on the brink of
collapse.

What happened next could have happened in many different ways.
Or, it might not have happened at all. There are many adult Maxes
out there who have managed not to trip and fall. They simply live
frenetic lives, a whirligig of high stimulation and often high
achievement, with an abiding sense that their world is on the brink of
collapse.

But Max, fortunately, did trip and fall. It could have been academic
failure or drugs or alcohol or some high-risk prank. In Max’s case,
though, it was the unusual route of wrestling. In an effort to make
weight, he violated all the rules; he was found comatose and
thoroughly dehydrated in his basement room. When he was
hospitalized, his family doctor was sensitive enough to see this
episode as a signal of some pretty serious psychological problems.
In the course of Max’s evaluation, neuropsychological testing
revealed, in addition to Max’s already documented high IQ, a
number of other issues. There was good evidence that he had
attention deficit disorder. Second, projective testing revealed
extremely low self-esteem as well as recurring depressive themes and
images. In marked contrast to his cheerful exterior, Max’s inner life
was, in the words of the psychologist, “full of chaos and impulse
surrounded by a fog of depression, heated by desperation.”
At a parent-child meeting with the psychologist, Max’s mother
broke down in tears. “It’s not your fault,” Max said softly. His father
cleared his throat defensively. “It’s not your fault either, Dad.”
“It’s nobody’s fault,” the psychologist interrupted, and began to
explain to Max and his parents what they had been living with for
these many years.
“But if it’s this attention deficit thing,” his mother said, “why didn’t
we pick it up earlier? I feel so guilty.”
“It often goes undiagnosed,” the psychologist said, “particularly in
bright children.”
The more Max listened, the more things began to fit together and
make sense to him. What he had known about himself, dimly,
intuitively, for a long while finally had a name. “Just giving it a name
really helps,” Max said.

“Better than calling you Mad Max,” his father said. “I guess we all
have some guilt to deal with.”
“But the good news is that there are some corrective steps we can
take now,” the psychologist said. “It won’t be an easy process, but life
will be a lot better than it has been.”
There are a few points from Max’s story worth highlighting. He
came from a relatively stable family. It is important to dispel any
notion that ADD is someone’s fault. While inadequate parenting can
exacerbate the situation, it does not cause it. We don’t know for sure
what causes it—as stated earlier, our best evidence says it’s genetic—
but we do know it is not the result of bad mothering or fathering.
Max’s high IQ delayed the diagnosis of ADD. When a child is
obviously bright and gets good grades, one often fails to consider
ADD as a possibility. This is a mistake. Many very bright children
have ADD. Missing the diagnosis in these bright children can lead
them to use their intelligence and creativity in the service of getting
into interesting mischief but to miss out on making the most of
school.
A corollary to this point is that the diagnosis of ADD should not
carry with it the perception of an educational death sentence. After
all the testing and psychiatric interviews children and their parents
go through en route to the diagnosis, many a parent and child leaves

into interesting mischief but to miss out on making the most of
school.
A corollary to this point is that the diagnosis of ADD should not
carry with it the perception of an educational death sentence. After
all the testing and psychiatric interviews children and their parents
go through en route to the diagnosis, many a parent and child leaves
the consulting room where the diagnosis of ADD has just been
pronounced thinking they have been told, in very fancy language,
that the child is stupid. A frequent though hidden component of the
emotional experience of ADD is the feeling of being defective or
retarded. It is very important that parents and teachers reassure the
child about this matter. While one doesn’t rejoice at the diagnosis of
ADD, neither need one despair. With help, children with ADD can
draw on their emotional and intellectual strengths.

Max’s story also brings out the crucial difference between the
primary and secondary symptoms of ADD. Primary symptoms are
the symptoms of the syndrome itself: distractibility, impulsivity,
restlessness, and so forth. The secondary symptoms, and the ones
that are most difficult to treat, are the symptoms that develop in the
wake of the primary syndrome not being recognized: low self-esteem,
depression, boredom and frustration with school, fear of learning
new things, impaired peer relations, sometimes drug or alcohol
abuse, stealing, or even violent behavior due to mounting frustration.
The longer the diagnosis of ADD is delayed, the greater the
secondary problems may become. There are a great many adults out
there in the world with undiagnosed ADD who think of themselves in
all sorts of unnecessary negative terms. They may have fast-track
hyperkinetic personalities, be impatient, restless, impulsive, often
intuitive and creative but unable to follow through, frequently unable
to linger long enough to develop a stable intimate relationship.
Usually, they have self-esteem problems that began in childhood.
The earlier the diagnosis can be made, the better these secondary
problems can be managed, the sooner one can begin the creative
process of learning to live with one’s brain without the obstacles of
moralistic or taunting labels.
Max’s story is also meant to illustrate how ADD occurs within a
developmental framework. That is to say, it evolves over time, just as
a child’s personality and cognitive ability evolve over time. It is not a
stagnant phenomenon but a dynamic one, and its influence changes
over time. The tasks of each stage of development may be
unnecessarily difficult as long as the ADD remains undiagnosed.
Even with a proper diagnosis, ADD will pose problems along the
way, but at least the problems will be recognized.
Although we tend to focus on the cognitive aspects of ADD, it is
equally important to pay attention to how this disorder affects
relations between people. Max’s friends thought he was egocentric or
on drugs, that these possibilities explained his spacing out or failing
to connect with them; many adults also misinterpret the emotional

Although we tend to focus on the cognitive aspects of ADD, it is
equally important to pay attention to how this disorder affects
relations between people. Max’s friends thought he was egocentric or
on drugs, that these possibilities explained his spacing out or failing
to connect with them; many adults also misinterpret the emotional

style of the ADD child. People with ADD often do not pick up on the
subtle social cues and messages that are crucial in getting along with
others. They may appear to be blasé or indifferent or self-centered or
even hostile when they are simply confused or unaware of what is
going on around them. As they become more confused, they may get
angry or they may withdraw, both responses causing interpersonal
damage. Bear in mind that just as the child may have trouble
focusing on his math assignment, so he may also have a hard time
listening to an account of what his friend did over the summer. These
problems with people can be just as damaging over the long run to
one’s ability to get on in the world as the cognitive problems.
The family problems alluded to in Max’s story can be severe indeed
and contribute heavily to the painful experience of ADD. Children
with ADD are often the source of family squabbles or marital discord.
Parents get so angry and frustrated that they lash out, not only at the
child but at each other. Soon full-scale battles erupt as the child
becomes the scapegoat for everything that’s wrong in the family. This
same process can happen in the classroom. Two or three children
with undiagnosed ADD can turn a happy classroom into a war zone
and a kind and competent teacher into a burned-out wreck. ADD is
almost never a one-person problem. It affects whole classrooms and
entire families.
The next example centers on a family.
Theresa and Matt were married without children when Theresa
met David and Danny, a set of twins. She was working as a pediatric
nurse in a hospital in Providence. “David and Danny were three years
old,” Theresa explained. “They were patients of the pediatrics ward.
That was the first contact I had ever had with them. They were
admitted to the hospital for social reasons. They had severe failure to
thrive but really were admitted for social reasons.
“It was very apparent in the emergency room that their mother
was mentally unable to take care of the children. They were in the

hospital for three and a half months. I would see them every day
because they were sick children, but they were also running wild
throughout the ward every day. I would go down there and they
would be just starving for attention, and they loved anybody who
gave them attention. I would go down there every day and they
would be sort of all over me, running around, throwing things,
climbing on me. That’s how I got to know them.”
The prevalence of ADD is higher among foster children and
adopted children than it is among the general population. It has been
suggested that this is due to higher rates of parental risk factors
associated with ADD, such as drug abuse and mental illness, among
the people who give their children up for adoption or have children
removed from the home. In any case, the state placed Danny and
David with Theresa and Matt. After various negotiations with the
Department of Social Services (DSS), Theresa and Matt were allowed
to adopt the twins. But there were many problems along the way.
Danny and David were wild, out-of-control kids. They were in

removed from the home. In any case, the state placed Danny and
David with Theresa and Matt. After various negotiations with the
Department of Social Services (DSS), Theresa and Matt were allowed
to adopt the twins. But there were many problems along the way.
Danny and David were wild, out-of-control kids. They were in
constant motion, eating erratically, unable to carry on what would be
considered normal conversations for their age. It was clear to
Theresa from the moment she met them that there was something
wrong. The only question was what. Certainly, one part of the
problem was that for the first three years of their lives they had not
had a stable home or adequate shelter or sufficient nourishment.
How much neurological damage was done during those years
remains unclear.
But even after they had been nourished properly and stabilized in
the home of Theresa and Matt, severe difficulties persisted. Theresa
said, “There were behavior problems. At day care they were on the
verge of being dismissed because the daycare center could not handle
them—their activity level, their impulsiveness, the fact that they
couldn’t lay down and sleep when everybody else did, that they
would want something and then get it without asking. If they wanted
something, they just went after it. If they wanted to do something,
then they did it. If they were outside and felt like climbing up six feet

on a pole and jumping off, at the age of four, they would do it! They
had no control over their behavior at all. So when we took them to
the psychiatrist, the recommendation was that they go to a special
school that could handle their ‘emotional problems.’ ”
For the next couple of years the boys were treated in a special
therapeutic nursery school. It was thought by the school that their
disruptive behavior was due to unconscious, repressed feelings they
harbored about being adopted, about being “abandoned” by their
biological mother. Theresa vigorously disagreed with this assessment
but went along with the treatment because she had been told by the
Department of Social Services to do so. Since at that time she did not
have legal custody of the children, she was compelled to do what the
DSS told her or face losing the children.
The situation did not improve as treatment at the special school
went on. As Theresa put it, “Both Danny and David had several
teachers in the groups [in the therapeutic day school]. I had to hire
them a tutor because I realized that they were not learning anything.
Now they were seven, going on eight, and they still didn’t know how
to read numbers, they didn’t know anything. I thought they were
learning things at the school, but I came to find out they weren’t
learning reading and writing and arithmetic. They spent fifteen
minutes a day on these things and the rest of the day was spent on
therapy. Therapy was getting together and sitting in a group with the
other little children and discussing what your problems were. And if
you didn’t discuss your problems, you were timed out. If you
wouldn’t talk, you were timed out. Timed out meant that you went
and you sat on somebody’s lap in the group; time out from group was
that. If you fought them, to get off their lap, you were then held to the
ground by two of them until you ‘gained control of yourself.’
“Well, Danny and David did not gain control of themselves. They
just fought all the more. They would come home and tell me that so

and you sat on somebody’s lap in the group; time out from group was
that. If you fought them, to get off their lap, you were then held to the
ground by two of them until you ‘gained control of yourself.’
“Well, Danny and David did not gain control of themselves. They
just fought all the more. They would come home and tell me that so
and so had a bloody nose today because they were held on the floor
and the person banged their face against the floor when they were

holding them down. Frequently, Danny and David were held to the
floor by two people, one on the arms, one on the legs. Danny and
David were able, by the end of the year, to display to me—me, who
had worked in pediatrics for years—how to control a child who was
out of control, better than I could ever, ever have done myself. They
knew exactly. There is no doubt in my mind that this kind of physical
restraint was done to them frequently because they knew exactly how
to restrain a child so that he could not move.”
I asked whether the school restrained them this way because they
wouldn’t talk about their problems.
“It was because they wouldn’t talk or wouldn’t participate in some
group. Or Danny and David would start doing cartwheels during
group therapy, or they would be looking out the window or get up
and walk around in circles. Danny was always the one who was more
active and he would be the one who would be more disruptive, not in
the manner that he would talk out, but in the manner that he would
be going off on his own or doing something or standing on his head.
He went through several years of standing on his head continually.
“So that’s how the school would handle the problem. They
continually badgered Danny and David about their biological
mother, about why Danny and David wouldn’t talk about her, about
how it was OK to talk about her, about how it was OK to talk about
the fact that she left them. Her leaving them was continually put into
their heads. What Matt and I had been telling Danny and David all
along was the truth of the matter: their biological mother was
mentally unfit. But that’s not the way we would put it. We would tell
them that their biological mother was unable to take care of them
because she had problems. She loved them, she wanted them, she
fought for them, but she just could not manage having children with
her. And the school would continually contradict that message with
their message about a mother who had abandoned her children. I
would fight with the school and tell the school that it was wrong for
them to tell the kids bad things, untrue things, about their mother. I

told the school the kids were not to be told that their biological
mother left them. She did not leave them. They were taken away
from her. Instead, the school insisted on telling Danny and David
that she left them and they should talk about it, talk about it, talk
about it. If they didn’t, they would be, you know, reprimanded.”
The school felt that the boys needed more intensive treatment.
Theresa said, “Their recommendation, based on all their
psychological testing, was to put Danny into a Point Four program in
the local public school system. A Point Four program is the most
restrictive program that you can have in a public school system. And
they recommended that David go to a Point Five program, which is a
step before a residential program, a step before placing him as an
inpatient at a psychiatric hospital. There was still no diagnosis except

the local public school system. A Point Four program is the most
restrictive program that you can have in a public school system. And
they recommended that David go to a Point Five program, which is a
step before a residential program, a step before placing him as an
inpatient at a psychiatric hospital. There was still no diagnosis except
for the diagnosis of emotional problems. Basically, we were told by
the school that Danny and David would never really be anything.
They had low IQs, according to the school, and with their history,
they said, would never amount to anything.”
The parents did not believe this assessment. After extensive
haggling with the DSS, they got permission to take Danny and David
out of the special school and place them in the local public school.
This school happened to have an excellent learning specialist who
suggested that the diagnosis of ADD might be worth looking into.
This points up the importance of a second opinion. For years the
special school, staffed by top-notch professionals, had believed in
one working diagnosis, namely behavioral problems due to
emotional conflict. And, indeed, that diagnosis was accurate as far as
it went. As is so often the case, once one diagnosis is made, it is
terribly difficult for those who made it to revise that diagnosis. In
this case a second opinion was needed from someone outside the
school, someone not limited by adherence to a single precept.
When Theresa and Matt got the opinion of the learning specialist
at the new school, they found out that Danny and David had severe
ADD as well. The treatment they had received at the special school,

not aimed at ADD but rather at uncovering unconscious conflict,
might have caused the children great harm had it not been stopped.
Theresa finished the story as follows: “This was SeptemberOctober when we first brought them to you. I had decided I could not
control their behavior at home anymore—it was so unsafe, and so
many accidents had happened. I remember someone came to my
house one day and Danny had been doing cartwheels for one and a
half hours in the room we were in. I didn’t pay attention to it because
it was always the way life was for us. The person visiting me was a
nurse and she said, ‘Theresa, you know, I don’t mean to say anything
about Danny, but don’t you think it’s a little strange that he has not
stopped doing cartwheels for the last one and a half hours?’ And I
said, ‘Yeah, but that’s the way he is, you know, he’s just very active.’
“But it did get unsafe. They were being unsafe with each other and
somebody was going to get hurt. I had decided that it was time to try
something different. I had given Danny and David that year to be
free, to see where they were going.…
“I came to see you and you started them on medication. And over a
period of two weeks to a month their response to Ritalin was
phenomenal. The teachers were amazed at the fact that these
children, who had been so disruptive to the classroom, now could sit
in their seats. David, who could not sit at his desk for longer than five
minutes without flipping the desk over, well, all this sort of thing
stopped. It all stopped.
“They were both mainstreamed, with a resource room available to
them just in case something happened.
“They’ve had their problems, like any other child has problems in
school. Their behavior is not always appropriate, it is not ageappropriate still, and my assessment is that their behavior will never

“They were both mainstreamed, with a resource room available to
them just in case something happened.
“They’ve had their problems, like any other child has problems in
school. Their behavior is not always appropriate, it is not ageappropriate still, and my assessment is that their behavior will never
be age-appropriate, that there will always be a lag—a lag physically, a

lag mentally—there will always be a lag time because they lost too
much time the first three years of their life. But we can handle that.
“They are now in fourth grade. In a matter of two years they have
accomplished four years of school. They went from being told they
would never get out of a Point Four classroom, they went from being
told they would never amount to anything, to doing four grades in
two years. On their most recent report cards nothing is
unsatisfactory with their work. David has had some problems this
semester, occasional fighting and those issues, but both kids are
considered very bright by their teachers and are very well liked by
most of their peers. They get along. It’s a tough school. The teachers
have told us that it is a tough school and Danny and David are the
only new children there. All the other kids have been together for
four years, four to six years.
“Danny and David started taking piano lessons about a year and a
half ago. The assessment by their piano teacher is that Danny is
playing at the level of a high-school student and they are both at least
six years beyond where she would expect them to be. Danny and
David play and listen to Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, Tchaikovsky, all
the great composers. That’s who they listen to, that is what they play.
They are exceptionally talented on the piano. They also take karate.
They have taken it for three or four years. Last year both of them won
awards in sparring. They have done exceptionally well. Karate has
really taught them a lot about focusing and discipline and all the
things they have needed to learn.
“They are fantastically athletic. They can basically pick up any
sport that they want to and do well at it. They both take ballet and
have been in a recital already. They both take tap, too. They’ve had
their recital and are the only two boys in the entire school to have
done that. Matt and I do not push them to do these things. We have
had a lot of conversations where we have sat down and said, ‘Listen,
this is too much.…’ Because besides doing these things they also
work out three to four hours a day in karate and they take

gymnastics. They are considered natural gymnasts. In addition, they
play soccer, which I actually took them out of last year. That was a
very big disappointment to their coach because they were the stars of
the team. We’ve sat down and said, ‘You guys, this is too much, you
have too much homework to do, you have too much working out to
do—you cannot do everything every day of the week.’ They cried.
They didn’t want to take anything out of the schedules. I mean,
financially, we are in ruins because of them! But they won’t give
anything up; they want to stay in everything. Danny thought that
ballet was for girls but he loves it now and is waiting for his recital.
Both of them are stars of the ballet recital that is going to be coming
up, because again, they have a natural ability. And what they have
done in karate helps them in ballet because they are as flexible as can
be.

anything up; they want to stay in everything. Danny thought that
ballet was for girls but he loves it now and is waiting for his recital.
Both of them are stars of the ballet recital that is going to be coming
up, because again, they have a natural ability. And what they have
done in karate helps them in ballet because they are as flexible as can
be.
“I’ve had a lot of concern.… I’ve worried a lot that we were pushing
them, asking too much of them, that they were doing these things
only for me. But they won’t drop anything. I would like them to stop
some of these things! (Laughs.) Because I would like to not have to
spend so much money! It costs a thousand dollars per month for
their activities and that doesn’t include tournaments and all the
things they go to, and costumes.
“But it is worth it. With their ADD, they have to put all that energy
somewhere. We want them to be ready for adolescence. And so we
are trying our hardest to make sure that they do not get with a wrong
group of children. I worry. I worry because Danny especially
continues to be very, very impulsive, and you just don’t know.
“These children are … I mean, had we had these children in the
appropriate place when we first got them, they probably would have
been child prodigies in something. Instead, we were led to believe we
had adopted severely disturbed children. We thought, Oh my God,
what have we got ourselves into? Here are two kids who we are going
to have to support when they are thirty-five. That was what we were

told back then. Our belief now is that these kids have the world open
to them. They could do anything that they want to do.
“And let me say something else. I want to say something about the
issue of a parent who goes through this experience and finds out later
on that the child has been misdiagnosed and could have been treated
years before.
“The guilt is incredible, as a parent. Especially as a professional
who works with children every day and has let this go on. You feel
like you have … I mean, I feel responsible for the fact that for three,
four, however many years, I let Danny and David down, that I didn’t
give them the proper care that they should have been given. They
could be much further ahead than they are now—although I don’t
know how much further ahead these two could get!
“The guilt that you feel—all I can say is that it is incredible. Matt
feels it, too, but not as strongly as I do.”
I asked Theresa how it had affected their marriage.
“This is a general statement about children with ADD, particularly
ADD with hyperactivity like Danny and David have, and, in my case,
coupled with the experience of going through the therapeutic-school
problem and dealing with DSS. Beyond being destructive to a
marriage, and it probably destroys a lot of marriages, it creates issues
that will never, ever be able to be resolved. There were too many
people hurt. There were too many fights, too many hard feelings
between husband and wife about what happened and what didn’t
happen, what should have happened and what should not have
happened. In our case our marriage will never, never be the same.
Had we not had Danny and David, if we had not made the
commitment to stick with them, Matt and I would not be with each
other now.”
The story of Danny and David teaches many lessons, but one of the
most important is just how significant diagnosis really is in

happened. In our case our marriage will never, never be the same.
Had we not had Danny and David, if we had not made the
commitment to stick with them, Matt and I would not be with each
other now.”
The story of Danny and David teaches many lessons, but one of the
most important is just how significant diagnosis really is in

psychiatry. How dangerous and damaging it would have been had
these boys never been treated for the right condition.
Theresa and Matt are both strong, devoted parents who lived
through a nightmare and are now finding ways of steadying their
lives. As the interview with Theresa points out, the problems did not
end once the diagnosis of ADD was made and treatment begun. The
management of ADD is really a lifetime undertaking.
If there were ever poster children for ADD, Danny and David
would be good candidates. It is hard to believe how well they have
done, considering what they were up against. I see them now about
once a month. They come bounding into my office, usually in full,
colorful karate regalia, and start playing games right away—asking
permission first, of course. They are involved in all the activities
Theresa spoke of, and to listen to these crew-cut, karate-robed
“tough” kids talk about Mozart (pronounced mo-zaht) and Bach is to
appreciate the marvelous.
While Danny and David had relatively severe cases of ADD, there
are many moderate cases that frequently are not diagnosed until
adolescence. The following case concerns a boy who came from a
very stable, loving family. Will had all the advantages in his early life
that Danny and David did not have—including the attention of
excellent teachers in two fine schools. Yet his ADD was not
diagnosed until after he graduated from high school. Here are actual
excerpts from his teachers’ comments beginning in nursery school
and moving through the twelfth grade.
Notice in the comments what the teachers couldn’t recognize
because they were unaware of the existence of such a syndrome: the
thread of ADD running throughout. Listen in the comments for signs
in Will of distractibility and impulsivity, high energy and creativity,
enthusiasm and inconsistency. Look for signs of risk-taking, for
erratic academic performance, for underachievement. Note how

many times reference is made to Will’s not paying attention or to his
being disorganized. Hear how much the teachers like Will, how
imaginative they think he is, but how exasperated they become over
time at his difficulty in getting on track:
NURSERY SCHOOL, 1975: Will is an active, imaginative, and friendly
boy. He enjoys people and school. Most of his time is spent in
dramatic play with his best friend—usually acting out some
superhero escapade. This involves imaginary, daring physical feats.
KINDERGARTEN: Will enjoys an enviable position in kindergarten.
He is loved by everyone.
Will has a real flair for imagination, fantasy, and dramatic
playacting. This skill can be used to advantage; it can also be a
distraction for him.
FIRST GRADE: Will’s ability seems to exceed his performance in
terms of the amount of work he produces. He is a good reader, writes
interesting, usually humorous stories, and has good reading
comprehension. However, he dawdles over simple board work and
work sheets and takes longer than expected to complete questions on
his books. While his expression of ideas is sophisticated, his speech
is immature.
At times Will can work well independently, while at other times his

interesting, usually humorous stories, and has good reading
comprehension. However, he dawdles over simple board work and
work sheets and takes longer than expected to complete questions on
his books. While his expression of ideas is sophisticated, his speech
is immature.
At times Will can work well independently, while at other times his
conversations with friends interfere with his work. He gets into long
discussions that distract others as well as himself from work. He is
not careful with his materials or the appearance of his work. He
needs to learn to more accurately follow directions.
THIRD GRADE: Will has been unable to take full advantage of the
opportunities offered in workshop, as social relationships have
occupied a good deal of his time and energy this term. He has had
some difficulty organizing his ideas, and needs to develop a step-bystep approach. Will would gain greater satisfaction from results if he
were more committed to his work.

FOURTH GRADE: Will started out the year doing lovely work based
on the concept of the straight line. He came up with an original
solution. This together with previous experiences made me aware
that Will has artistic potential.
On the other hand, all his other work has been sloppily executed
and his general behavior very poor. His mind cannot focus on his
work, and he does not give his talent a chance to come out. I would
like to see Will make an effort to settle down in class.
SIXTH GRADE: Will has not yet completed many projects.…
Will seems to bring a sense of fun with him to the learning
environment.
His [lack of] organizational skills continue[s] to slow down his
academic progress.
At this point Will moved from one school to another, entering the
new school in the seventh grade.
SEVENTH GRADE: Will is a satisfactory to excellent student. With
more consistent effort, he could probably do very well in all subjects.
He must try to minimize the times when he lets himself become
distracted during class.
Will could be doing much better work in Latin if he would only
establish a regular routine of home study.… It is up to Will whether
or not he is satisfied with just passing work or whether he settles
down to achieve good results.
EIGHTH GRADE (January): This has been a year of improvement
and development for Will. His biggest problem now will be to
maintain the level of intensity needed to carry on this good record
and not to rest on his laurels or get careless. During the last few

weeks he has begun to enjoy himself more in his classes, which is
good if he doesn’t let this relaxed attitude keep him from paying
close attention.
NINTH GRADE (February) Ecology: Will is selling himself short in
this course. He is not keeping up with his note-taking, does not take
advantage of opportunities to make up poor tests, and did not
maintain his test average on the exam with a grade of only 67. This
laziness has been much more apparent in the latter half of the term.
Will could be doing better! Grade C+
(April) English: His writing doesn’t show his good insight because
it is underdeveloped—urge him to take care with it: his ideas are
worth the effort! Grade: C+
(April) Ecology: Will must take his work more seriously and use
the good ability he has. Grade: D
TENTH GRADE (November) French: Will’s knowledge of France and
his sense of humor make great contributions. He just needs to focus
his mind a little more.… Grade: B

it is underdeveloped—urge him to take care with it: his ideas are
worth the effort! Grade: C+
(April) Ecology: Will must take his work more seriously and use
the good ability he has. Grade: D
TENTH GRADE (November) French: Will’s knowledge of France and
his sense of humor make great contributions. He just needs to focus
his mind a little more.… Grade: B
(November) Biology: Will has the ability to do as well as he pleases
in biology. To date, he has seldom put forth a full effort. He is the
first to admit that with more effort he could be doing better, yet he is
often the first to conduct himself poorly in class. I get very frustrated
with someone like Will who has the ability to do very well and only
does average work. Grade: C
(January) Biology: The improvement in Will’s attitude and effort
has been absolutely amazing. At midterm I mentioned that Will
seldom put forth full effort. This statement is no longer true.… A
little extra concentration will be beneficial. Grade: B
(April) French: This may be a long spring for Will. A 20 on a quiz
is typical of the type of nosedive that plagues him. I am also troubled
by the difficulty he sometimes has paying attention in class. All this

is offset by his good humor.… Of course, his innate ability can help
him too, if he applies it a little more. Grade: C+
(April) Biology: Will is the type of student that you very much
enjoy having in the classroom because he is always energetic and
keeps the class alive with interesting questions. Will is also the type
of student that can frustrate the heck out of a teacher because at
times he is just not into what he is doing and does not work to his
potential. Grade: B
(April) Math: Wow! A student emerges! As of late, Will’s work has
been excellent. I hope success will breed success and Will will finish
the year with a flourish! Grade: B+
(June) Math: The student disappeared. I don’t know why Will
worked hard at times and at times did nothing. The last month he
spent more time worrying about the dress code than doing math.
Grade: C
(June) English: I very much enjoyed teaching him—he’s bright and
enthusiastic. And with his Klinger version of civil disobedience
[relating to the dress code], he showed that he knows how to apply
abstract knowledge in the moral world. I was pleased.
ELEVENTH GRADE (January) English: Will’s exam was the best in
the class, and a recent story he wrote was also outstanding. Perhaps
as he continues to mature, he will achieve consistency. He obviously
has intelligence and skill. Grade: Exam, A–; Semester, B–
(January) Science: Will seems to have academic moods that show
a wide variation of productiveness. There were times when he
literally held out and then he would show a burst of energy and do
some fine work. This stop-and-go approach to learning greatly
dilutes Will’s learning. Grade: B
(June) English: … I was greatly impressed with his articulate
discussion of how what we do does not discount the basic goodness

a wide variation of productiveness. There were times when he
literally held out and then he would show a burst of energy and do
some fine work. This stop-and-go approach to learning greatly
dilutes Will’s learning. Grade: B
(June) English: … I was greatly impressed with his articulate
discussion of how what we do does not discount the basic goodness

of who we are. Grade: B–
TWELFTH GRADE (January) Physics: Will remains extremely
unpredictable, yet managed to squeeze his average forward slightly
with a recent makeup exam on the dynamics of motion. Will must
continuously overcome chronic tardiness, missed classes, haphazard
organization, and lapses of attention during class, and still manage to
concentrate on the specific topics at hand. Unfortunately he will not
receive as many chances for redemption in the future.… Grade C–
(January) Philosophy: Will is an eloquent and often impassioned
participant in our discussions in class. His essay on the
imprisonment of Japanese-Americans was insightful, although very
late. Grade: C
(April) Physics: I have only praise for Will’s improved overall
efforts in physics thus far. His punctuality and consistent
attentiveness have improved, and he is handling himself responsibly.
(April) French: Will is not making any perceptible effort. I don’t
want to put him on the defensive, and he may be making some effort
that I can’t see.…
(April) Good and Evil: Will is an eloquent and impassioned
participant in our class discussions … but I hope to see more
consistency.…
(April) Ceramics: Will is capable of producing nice work when he
wants to but often becomes distracted by friends.
Varsity Squash: Will had a good season. Despite injuries and
having to play our best player every day in practice, Will maintained
a very positive attitude. As in soccer, what Will lacks in talent he
more than makes up for in spirit.

Will’s story is, unfortunately, very common. The picture of a young
child who starts out well and then gradually sees his school
performance tail off while teachers grow increasingly moralistic in
their explanations should always suggest the possibility of ADD.
I let Will’s teachers’ comments tell his story because they do it so
well. They show us the cute, creative little boy who as early as
kindergarten was getting distracted easily and distracting others.
They show us the exasperation of teachers who knew Will could do
better if only he would try harder, as they said in so many different
ways. They show us the boy that “you very much enjoy having in the
classroom,” who at the same time can “frustrate the heck out of a
teacher because at times he is just not into what he is doing.” They
show us the Will who can be impassioned, articulate, committed to
some cause we hear about involving civil disobedience and the dress
code, and they show us the Will who can seem not to care at all. They
show us Will the inconsistent. As one teacher put it, “I get very
frustrated with someone like Will who has the ability to do very well
and only does average work.” Just as one teacher is giving up on him,
stating almost biblically, “Unfortunately, he will not have as many
chances for redemption in the future,” Will comes through, leading
the same teacher months later to state, “I have only praise for Will’s
overall efforts.” But then, as another teacher is praising him,
cheering, “Wow! A student emerges!” Will’s performance

stating almost biblically, “Unfortunately, he will not have as many
chances for redemption in the future,” Will comes through, leading
the same teacher months later to state, “I have only praise for Will’s
overall efforts.” But then, as another teacher is praising him,
cheering, “Wow! A student emerges!” Will’s performance
deteriorates, leading the same teacher to comment, months later,
“The student disappeared.”
The themes of ADD run throughout: inconsistency, and
inconsistency again, creativity, provocative behavior, winning
personality, varying motivation, exasperating forgetfulness,
disorganization and indifference, underachievement, impulsivity,
and the search for excitement rather than discipline.
I put Will’s story in this book not to chide the school or the
teachers or parents for missing the diagnosis of ADD. Nobody picked
up on it, nobody, from parents to pediatrician, to school, to anybody

else, because nobody knew what to look for. When Will was in
school, not many people were that conversant with ADD. Nobody is
to blame for the diagnosis being missed. If anything, the teachers
and parents should be praised for their continuing, patient effort to
help Will work to his potential. The damage they did, although real,
was inadvertent.
Without knowing about ADD, one looks at Will’s reports and
simply sees a boy who is terribly inconsistent and probably needs to
buckle down. But when you know there is such a thing as attention
deficit disorder, and what the symptoms are, then it is astonishing
how all Will’s teachers’ comments fall into place, describing various
manifestations of Will’s ADD.
The situation is like one of those trick photographs: when you’re
shown it the first time, you see nothing but a black and white blotchy
mess. Then, when you are told it is actually a photograph of the face
of a cow, the cow’s face jumps out at you, clear as can be, and you can
never look at the photograph again without seeing the face of that
cow.
How much happier and more productive Will’s school years could
have been if people had known he had ADD all along. The moral
condemnation that seeps into so many of the comments could have
been excised, the inconsistency of Will’s academic work could have
been understood in terms other than those of laziness or selfishness
or irresponsibility. His intermittent poor performance could have
found remedies more effective than exhortation or disapprobation,
and, in short, Will could have gotten more out of school.
Another reason for including Will’s story is to stress that the child
with ADD need not be flunking out of school, or have a specific
learning disability, or be so hyperactive as to be disruptive, or a
major discipline problem. He, or she, can be like Will: an attractive,
well-liked student, given to periods of high achievement as well as
periods of low, moving along from grade to grade without anybody

with ADD need not be flunking out of school, or have a specific
learning disability, or be so hyperactive as to be disruptive, or a
major discipline problem. He, or she, can be like Will: an attractive,
well-liked student, given to periods of high achievement as well as
periods of low, moving along from grade to grade without anybody

thinking anything much was wrong that a little growing up or a kick
in the pants wouldn’t cure.
By the time a solid diagnosis of ADD had been made for Will he
was about to flunk out of college. By then his self-image had
solidified around such ideas as “I’m lazy”; “I’m a born B.S. artist”; “I
never really come through when I should”; and “I’m talented, but I
don’t dare to give it my best shot in case I might fail.”
As Will learned about ADD, he had mixed reactions, reactions that
are not uncommon, particularly among young men. On the one
hand, Will felt a sense of relief. He was excited to know there was a
name for his problem other than laziness, a cause for his trouble
other than “badness” of character. And he was excited that there was
treatment available. On the other hand, Will was skeptical. A part of
him did not believe in the diagnosis. It was too perfect to be true. A
part of him felt much more comfortable with calling himself lazy
than with accepting the idea of ADD.
Will felt more at home seeing his life in terms of a sort of macho
struggle, a struggle he was losing, a struggle to “buckle down” or to
“shape up,” than in seeing himself as not totally in control, the victim
of a syndrome called ADD.
In addition to resisting the diagnosis, Will also resisted the
treatment, which included medication. He didn’t want to rely on a
pill, as he put it, to think straight. In fact, the medication, which in
Will’s case was Ritalin, worked very well to help him focus. However,
Will would only take it erratically. When he took it, his grades
improved; when he stopped it, they went back down. This linear
correspondence between school performance and taking the
medication, if anything, impressed Will too much. It left him feeling
that it was the medication, not himself, that was getting the good
grades. So he would discontinue the medication in an effort to prove
he could make it on his own. This cycle of Will’s taking the
medication followed by improved grades followed by stopping the

medication followed by falling grades repeated itself a dozen times
during Will’s college career. He never reached the point where he
could see the medication as a legitimate treatment, like eyeglasses,
instead of a crutch or even a form of cheating. Will subjected his life
to a rigorous, if idiosyncratic, code of honor. And taking medication
sometimes went against his code of honor.
This kind of deep-seated self-reliance is not uncommon among
young males diagnosed with ADD. It was preferable to Will to go it
on his own, albeit with great difficulty in focusing and concentrating,
than to rely on a medication, however helpful it may have been. It
was easier for him to make use of coaching—tips from family,
therapist, and others who knew about ADD.
With this combination of insight, support, intermittent
medication, and intermittent hard work, Will eventually put together
a fairly good college career, after a near-disastrous start. He
continues to wrestle with the diagnosis of ADD. He also continues to
be warm, gregarious, friendly, creative—and often depressed, due to

With this combination of insight, support, intermittent
medication, and intermittent hard work, Will eventually put together
a fairly good college career, after a near-disastrous start. He
continues to wrestle with the diagnosis of ADD. He also continues to
be warm, gregarious, friendly, creative—and often depressed, due to
his underachieving. He fiercely resists using the diagnosis of ADD as
a crutch. At the same time, he continues to be brought up short by
the limitations ADD places upon him.
Not surprisingly, Will’s ADD took a toll on his parents. They are
no-nonsense Yankee types who all along thought Will was a creative,
talented kid who just couldn’t get his act together. They tried all the
tactics parents of adolescents try: they yelled at him, they grounded
him, they ignored him, they fought with him, they negotiated with
him, they sent him to a psychotherapist, they hovered over him, they
bribed him, they scolded him, they pleaded with him, they hugged
him. They always loved him, and they never gave up on him, but they
felt endlessly exasperated at his inconsistency and apparent lack of
effort. They wanted the best for him, and they ached for him while
helplessly watching him apparently let so much promise slip away.

After the diagnosis of ADD was made, and after Will had spent a
couple of years in college, he said something to his mom which
prompted a letter, which I excerpt here.
Dear Will,
We know so well how much you care—about us, about the
family, about doing well, about honesty and pride and
compassion. You are an incredible person and have been ever
since you were a little boy. I’ve always said that you were born
smiling. You were. People looked at you when you were a baby,
and they smiled back. You had an innate something that just
made people happy—and you were happy.
It killed me to watch that happy little boy fade into a frustrated
adolescent. Where did Will go? Dad and I tried to understand.
We hadn’t a clue that there was even such a thing as ADD, and
neither did you. So, what do you do when you watch a kid not do
his work, but then try, and then not try, and then be sad, etc., etc.
I yelled at you and tried to wake you up. Wrong tactic. Dad talked
soberly and grounded you. Again, wrong tactic. We were trying to
reach you on the only levels we knew. And all that time, we knew
we were missing the boat. We knew that we hadn’t found the key.
[Once the diagnosis was made], Dad and I knew we had blown it
with you.
So, Will. What do we say? Sorry? We are. I hope you know that.
We are so damned sorry. Part of it wasn’t our fault because no
one knew what ADD was, etc. But a lot of it was our fault, because
we knew something was wrong and we didn’t find out what it
was. That is what parents are supposed to do. We were trying, but
we screwed up. It’s not because we didn’t care about you. We
cared.
Do you believe that? I could see that you might not. But
actually, I know that you know just how much we cared, and care.

we knew something was wrong and we didn’t find out what it
was. That is what parents are supposed to do. We were trying, but
we screwed up. It’s not because we didn’t care about you. We
cared.
Do you believe that? I could see that you might not. But
actually, I know that you know just how much we cared, and care.

… We look on you as a really terrific person who we love to have
be around us. I think of you as one of my best friends as well as
my little kid (no longer). Who do I call when something goes
wrong with one of the other kids? How much do I ask for your
advice? You must see how much I value your judgment.…
But I also think you are struggling to figure out who you are
and what you want out of life. Any kid your age worth anything is
in the same situation. Some don’t show it obviously, but most
kids are worried and wondering. There’s a lot to worry about. On
top of this, you are trying to figure out how to deal with ADD. You
are right when you say that Dad and I don’t really understand it.
We don’t, but we are trying. We want to. And we want to help you
get a handle on it. I think that you beat it last year—although you
are still fighting it and will always have to—last spring you won. It
was great! I think you are making tremendous progress dealing
with a disability that is so insidiously difficult that it’s amazing
you don’t just quit. But that isn’t you and never has been.
Frustration! We do understand frustration. When you have a
little kid you absolutely adore, you will understand better how
frustrated Dad and I have been. At you, sure—but on your behalf
even more. We wanted you to feel successful and happy. You
might not think that we do, but we do. We understand—we hate it
that you have to deal with ADD—and we can’t fix it. Dad wants to
fix it. But we can’t. Only you can do that, and it is an ongoing
process. What we can do is tell you that we understand and care
very, very much. We want to help in any way that we can, but it is
up to you now to let us know how.…
Always, always we loved you and were solidly behind you no
matter what scrape you got yourself into. Always. I think that is
one of the few things you can count on in your life. Your parents
think you are great. And there is nothing that, as a team, we can’t
beat. You’ll figure out ADD. I think you are well on your way.…

Love, 
Mom

3

“SEQUENCE RAVELLED OUT OF SOUND”

ADULT ADD
I felt a Cleaving in my Mind—
As if my Brain had split—
I tried to match it—Seam by Seam—
But could not make them fit.
The thought behind, I strove to join
Unto the thought before—
But Sequence ravelled out of Sound—
Like Balls—upon a Floor.
 —Emily Dickinson (1864)
Emily Dickinson captures with her customary startling simplicity the
distress of the ADD mind. Although of course not written explicitly
about ADD, this lyric poem gives a wonderfully apt description of the
subjective experience of ADD. “I felt a Cleaving in my Mind— / As if
my Brain had split.” Not a cleft, but a cleaving; the use of the gerund
just adds to the activity of the description. How many of us with ADD
have felt, as we whirl around from one project to the next, trying to
stay abreast of the mounting mass of details, that our brains were
about to split? And then we look down to find our projects rolling
around, like balls upon the floor. Most adults with ADD are
struggling to express a part of themselves that often seems unraveled
as they strive to join the thought behind unto the thought before.
As we are learning more and more about ADD in adults, we are
realizing how far-reaching its impact can be.*
In 1978 Leopold Bellak chaired a conference on what was then
called minimal brain dysfunction (now ADD) in adults. The collected

papers from this conference were published in 1979 and comprise a
remarkable book—accurate, ahead of its time, full of new and
exciting data. The presenters at that conference, including Hans
Huessy, Dennis Cantwell, Paul Wender, Donald Klein, and others,
were onto something new and important. They were reporting on
their finding that MBD (or ADD) does not just go away in childhood.
Instead, it persists into adulthood and can be as vexing for adults as
it can be for children. Unfortunately, it took another decade before
people began to recognize the clinical significance of Bellak’s book—
how widespread ADD is in adults and what a human toll it exacts
when it is not diagnosed.
Bellak’s book, which is now out of print, was written for a
professional audience and was published under the dour title
Psychiatric Aspects of Minimal Brain Dysfunction in Adults. In the
popular press there is still very little. Paul Wender’s book, The
Hyperactive Child, Adolescent, and Adult, is an excellent text for the
layperson that includes a brief section on adults. Lynn Weiss, a
psychologist from Texas, has written a book entitled Attention
Deficit Disorder in Adults that includes a great deal of useful
information. But our knowledge of ADD as it appears in adults is still
young, and the field is still finding itself.
Interestingly enough, one of the landmark studies in the entire
ADD area, a study that really marked a turning point in establishing
a biological basis for ADD, was done not on children but on adults by
Dr. Alan Zametkin, at the National Institutes of Mental Health. We
will discuss this study in detail in chapter 9, whose subject is the
biology of ADD. In brief, what Zametkin proved was that there is a
difference at the cellular level, in energy consumption, between the
parts of the brain that regulate attention, emotion, and impulse
control in subjects with ADD as compared with subjects without
ADD. The study was published in 1990 in one of the most highly
respected, rigorously edited of all medical journals, the New

difference at the cellular level, in energy consumption, between the
parts of the brain that regulate attention, emotion, and impulse
control in subjects with ADD as compared with subjects without
ADD. The study was published in 1990 in one of the most highly
respected, rigorously edited of all medical journals, the New
England Journal of Medicine. While there had been other studies

that suggested a biological basis for ADD before, this study was the
best designed and the most convincing.
Subsequent to that study, David Hauser and Alan Zametkin
published another study in 1993, again in the New England Journal
of Medicine, which added evidence to the biological basis for ADD.
Hauser and Zametkin found a strong correlation between a rare form
of thyroid dysfunction, called generalized resistance to thyroid
hormone (GRTH), and attention deficit disorder. It was interesting
enough to find a correlation between a certain kind of thyroid disease
and ADD. But to find the kind of correlation they reported—70
percent of people studied who had GRTH also had ADD—added
strong evidence to the growing data demonstrating a biological,
likely genetic, basis for ADD.
Since the publication of Zametkin’s study, and then Hauser and
Zametkin’s study, and with the ongoing excitement that surrounds
research in this field in general, many investigators have become
interested in adult ADD. We are only beginning to discover how
extensive ADD is—probably over 10 million American adults have it
—and we are only beginning to appreciate how dramatically effective
treatment for it can be.
As we have begun to understand the biological basis for it, we are
also beginning to know ADD in human terms: how it influences a
life, what shape it takes, how it can get in the way, how it can actually
help, and how it can best be managed.
Based on our experience with hundreds of patients, we have
compiled the following set of symptoms as being the most frequently
reported. The symptoms below are only “suggested” criteria,
suggested by us, based upon our experience with adults with ADD.
As yet, we do not have any criteria that have been tested and
validated by field trials as we do for children. These suggested
criteria summarize the symptoms we have seen most commonly in

adults with ADD. Other practitioners may well amend them
according to their own clinical experience.
As one reads down the list, certain themes emerge. There is the
classic triad of symptoms from childhood: distractibility, impulsivity,
and hyperactivity or restlessness. In addition, one sees problems
with moods, depression, self-esteem, and self-image. In general, the
symptoms are the logical outgrowth of what is encountered in
childhood.
SUGGESTED DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR ATTENTION
DEFICIT DISORDER IN ADULTS
NOTE: Consider a criterion met only if the behavior is
considerably more frequent than that of most people of the
same mental age.
A. A chronic disturbance in which at least fifteen of the following are
present:
1. A sense of underachievement, of not meeting one’s goals
(regardless of how much one has actually accomplished).
We put this symptom first because it is the most common
reason an adult seeks help. “I just can’t get my act together” is
the frequent refrain. The person may be highly accomplished
by objective standards, or may be floundering, stuck with a
sense of being lost in a maze, unable to capitalize on innate

We put this symptom first because it is the most common
reason an adult seeks help. “I just can’t get my act together” is
the frequent refrain. The person may be highly accomplished
by objective standards, or may be floundering, stuck with a
sense of being lost in a maze, unable to capitalize on innate
potential.
2. Difficulty getting organized.

A major problem for most adults with ADD. Without the
structure of school, without parents around to get things
organized for him or her, the adult may stagger under the
organizational demands of everyday life. The supposed “little
things” may mount up to create huge obstacles. For the want
of a proverbial nail—a missed appointment, a lost check, a
forgotten deadline—their kingdom may be lost.
3. Chronic procrastination or trouble getting started.
Adults with ADD associate so much anxiety with beginning
a task, due to their fears that they won’t do it right, that they
put it off, and off, which, of course, only adds to the anxiety
around the task.
4. Many projects going simultaneously; trouble with followthrough.
A corollary of number 3. As one task is put off, another is
taken up. By the end of the day, or week, or year, countless
projects have been undertaken, while few have found
completion.
5. Tendency to say what comes to mind without necessarily
considering the timing or appropriateness of the remark.
Like the child with ADD in the classroom, the adult with
ADD gets carried away in enthusiasm. An idea comes and it
must be spoken—tact or guile yielding to childlike exuberance.
6. A frequent search for high stimulation.
The adult with ADD is always on the lookout for something
novel, something engaging, something in the outside world
that can catch up with the whirlwind that’s rushing inside.
7. An intolerance of boredom.

A corollary of number 6. Actually, the person with ADD
seldom feels bored. This is because the millisecond he senses
boredom, he swings into action and finds something new; he
changes the channel.
8. Easy distractibility, trouble focusing attention, tendency to
tune out or drift away in the middle of a page or a
conversation, often coupled with an ability to hyperfocus at
times.
The hallmark symptom of ADD. The “tuning out” is quite
involuntary. It happens when the person isn’t looking, so to
speak, and the next thing you know, he or she isn’t there. The
often extraordinary ability to hyperfocus is also usually
present, emphasizing the fact that this is a syndrome not of
attention deficit but of attention inconsistency.
9. Often creative, intuitive, highly intelligent.
Not a symptom, but a trait deserving of mention. Adults
with ADD often have unusually creative minds. In the midst of
their disorganization and distractibility, they show flashes of
brilliance. Capturing this “special something” is one of the
goals of treatment.
10. Trouble in going through established channels, following
“proper” procedure.
Contrary to what one might think, this is not due to some
unresolved problem with authority figures. Rather, it is a
manifestation of boredom and frustration: boredom with
routine ways of doing things and excitement around novel
approaches, and frustration with being unable to do things the
way they’re “supposed” to be done.
11. Impatient; low tolerance for frustration.

unresolved problem with authority figures. Rather, it is a
manifestation of boredom and frustration: boredom with
routine ways of doing things and excitement around novel
approaches, and frustration with being unable to do things the
way they’re “supposed” to be done.
11. Impatient; low tolerance for frustration.

Frustration of any sort reminds the adult with ADD of all
the failures in the past. “Oh, no,” he thinks, “here we go
again.” So he gets angry or withdraws. The impatience derives
from the need for constant stimulation and can lead others to
think of the individual as immature or insatiable.
12. Impulsive, either verbally or in action, as in impulsive
spending of money, changing plans, enacting new schemes or
career plans, and the like.
This is one of the more dangerous of the adult symptoms,
or, depending on the impulse, one of the more advantageous.
13. Tendency to worry needlessly, endlessly; tendency to scan
the horizon looking for something to worry about, alternating
with inattention to or disregard for actual dangers.
Worry becomes what attention turns into when it isn’t
focused on some task.
14. Sense of insecurity.
Many adults with ADD feel chronically insecure, no matter
how stable their life situation may be. They often feel as if
their world could collapse around them.
15. Mood swings, mood lability, especially when disengaged
from a person or a project. The person with ADD can
suddenly go into a bad mood, then into a good mood, then
into a bad mood all in the space of a few hours and for no
apparent reasons. These mood swings are not as pronounced
as those associated with manic-depressive illness or
depression.
Adults with ADD, more than children, are given to unstable
moods. Much of this is due to their experience of frustration

and/or failure, while some of it is due to the biology of the
disorder.
16. Restlessness.
One usually does not see, in an adult, the full-blown
hyperactivity one may see in a child. Instead, one sees what
looks like “nervous energy”: pacing, drumming of fingers,
shifting position while sitting, leaving a table or room
frequently, feeling edgy while at rest.
17. Tendency toward addictive behavior.
The addiction may be to a substance such as alcohol or
cocaine, or to an activity, such as gambling, or shopping, or
eating, or overwork.
18. Chronic problems with self-esteem.
These problems are the direct and unhappy result of years
of frustration, failure, or of just not getting it right. Even the
person with ADD who has achieved a great deal usually feels
in some way defective. What is impressive is how resilient
most adults are, despite all the setbacks.
19. Inaccurate self-observation.
People with ADD are poor self-observers. They do not
accurately gauge the impact they have on other people. They
usually see themselves as less effective or powerful than other
people do.
20. Family history of ADD or manic-depressive illness or
depression or substance abuse or other disorders of impulse
control or mood.

People with ADD are poor self-observers. They do not
accurately gauge the impact they have on other people. They
usually see themselves as less effective or powerful than other
people do.
20. Family history of ADD or manic-depressive illness or
depression or substance abuse or other disorders of impulse
control or mood.

Since ADD is probably genetically transmitted and related
to the other conditions mentioned, it is not uncommon (but
not necessary) to find such a family history.
B. Childhood history of ADD. (It may not have been formally
diagnosed, but in reviewing the history, the signs and symptoms
must have been there.)
C. Situation not explained by other medical or psychiatric condition.
The criteria above are based on our clinical experience. They
emphasize the full range of symptoms associated with adult ADD.
Paul Wender has proposed another set of criteria for the diagnosis of
ADD adults that has been used by many practitioners and
researchers in the field. These criteria focus on the core symptoms of
adult ADD without going into associated symptoms or findings, such
as substance abuse or family history. These are commonly referred to
as the “Utah Criteria,” because Wender, a pioneer in the field of
ADD, is a professor of psychiatry at the University of Utah School of
Medicine.
UTAH CRITERIA FOR ADULT ADD
I. A childhood history of ADD with both attentional deficits
and motor hyperactivity, together with at least one of the
following characteristics: behavior problems in school,
impulsivity, overexcitability, and temper outbursts.
II. An adult history of persistent attentional problems and
motor hyperactivity together with two of the following five
symptoms: affective lability, hot temper, stress intolerance,
disorganization, and impulsivity.

While there are many points of agreement between our criteria
and the Utah criteria, the main difference between the two is that we
do recognize a syndrome of ADD without hyperactivity while the
Utah criteria do not. Wender himself recognizes that ADD without
hyperactivity exists as a clinical syndrome. However, his Utah
criteria do not include it because they, having been developed for
research purposes, select a more homogenous set of patients by
excluding those without a history of hyperactivity.
In our experience (and in the experience of many others) we have
seen a host of individuals, particularly women, who fit the clinical
picture of ADD perfectly, by both sets of criteria, except that they do
not have a history of hyperactivity. They do respond well to
treatment with stimulant medication or other standard medications
used for ADD. Their symptoms cannot be explained by any condition
other than ADD, and they do not respond as well to any medical
treatment other than the treatment for ADD. Therefore, we include
this nonhyperactive group as meeting our diagnostic criteria for
adult ADD.
Whatever diagnostic criteria one refers to, it cannot be stressed too
firmly in this book how important it is not to diagnose oneself. An
evaluation by a physician to confirm the diagnosis and to rule out
other conditions is essential.
Having laid out some diagnostic criteria, what does this syndrome
look like in real life? What is the typical picture of the adult with
ADD? There is no one defining portrait because the syndrome
includes so many subtypes. However, to get a further feel for ADD in
adults, let’s look at a few snapshots of different people with ADD:

Having laid out some diagnostic criteria, what does this syndrome
look like in real life? What is the typical picture of the adult with
ADD? There is no one defining portrait because the syndrome
includes so many subtypes. However, to get a further feel for ADD in
adults, let’s look at a few snapshots of different people with ADD:
Elizabeth is a forty-six-year-old woman who has struggled with
dyslexia since she was a child. What she didn’t realize until
recently was that she also has ADD. “I always knew I couldn’t

read. Well, I could read, but not very well. What I didn’t
understand was why I lived in such a disorganized state all the
time. I thought I was just spacey, you know, the ‘dizzy dame’
stereotype. I really bought into that. I thought I was simply inept.
Then I went to this women’s group and I found out about ADD
and everything makes sense for the first time. Why I
procrastinate. Why I have no confidence. Why I space out in the
middle of conversations. Why I can never seem to get it together.
I just wish I had found out about this earlier.”
Now a successful businessman and an upstanding member
of his community, Harry sheepishly brought me a folder an
inch-and-a-half thick from his first twelve years of school.
Although he was a very bright boy who scored well on aptitude
tests, in his file there were approximately sixty letters home to
Harry’s parents from the rabbi who was head of the school.
The letters all seemed to begin with words like, “We regret to
inform you …” Harry said his main memory of school was
sitting in the rabbi’s office watching him pick up an oldfashioned Dictaphone into which he would always utter the
same forbidding words: “To be added to the cumulative file of
Harry …” Harry dreaded the cumulative file. “It is full of the
misery of my youth. I want you to expunge it for me,” he said.
Although it could not be expunged, it could be explained
through the lens of ADD. It at last gave Harry an answer to
why he could never “do school,” as he put it. “It has gnawed at
my self-respect all these years. I’ve always hid from people the
fact I had so much difficulty finishing my degree. Now I know
why.”
Jack works as an editor for a magazine. He does well,
although he has a reputation for being rude. He leaves
meetings abruptly, without warning, fails to return telephone
calls, insults writers without knowing that he’s doing it, makes
no attempt to hide it when he’s bored, changes the subject
almost in mid-sentence, and in general lacks tact. “He’s

brilliant,” an associate says, “but he’s so unpredictable. You’ll
be talking to him, and you’ll look away for a moment, and
when you look back, he won’t be there anymore. You’ll be
thinking you’re having this really interesting conversation,
then poof!—he’s gone. It’s annoying, to say the least. On the
other hand, he’s great to have around because he’s so full of
ideas and energy.”
George does his work from his car. “I don’t know why I have
an office. I can’t sit in it for more than a few minutes before I
get this really creepy feeling. It’s like I’m being interred. Then
I get in my car, go out on the highway, pick up my car phone,
and I’m in business. I’ve got to be moving in order to think—
that’s all there is to it.”
“I like the way I am,” says Grace, who works in the movie
business. “I don’t know if anybody else does, but I’d be bored
being any other way. It’s a good thing I’m the boss or I’d get

I get in my car, go out on the highway, pick up my car phone,
and I’m in business. I’ve got to be moving in order to think—
that’s all there is to it.”
“I like the way I am,” says Grace, who works in the movie
business. “I don’t know if anybody else does, but I’d be bored
being any other way. It’s a good thing I’m the boss or I’d get
fired. Come and go as I please, take on new work before the
old is done, make spot decisions and undo them an hour later.
I don’t know how most people live their lives, so predictable.
That’s their bag, I guess, but it sure ain’t mine. L.A. is
probably the only city I’d survive in. Maybe Manhattan, but
the weather’s bad. Finding out about ADD at least gives me a
name for it, but I don’t want to change anything. Half this city
has ADD, you know. Probably can’t survive in this business
without it.”
Peter’s study looks like—well, let him describe it. “I have my
piles,” he says. “Everything I do goes into a pile. There are
little piles and big piles, stacks of papers, stacks of magazines,
stacks of books, stacks of bills. Some stacks are mixed. It’s like
a field, little piles with white tops scattered everywhere like
mushrooms. There’s no real organization to any of it. I’ll just
think that pile looks a little small, I can add something to it, or
this space needs a new pile, or these things I’ll move over to

this other pile. Somehow or other, I survive. The piles and I
must be in some kind of unconscious synchrony, I guess.”
These examples reflect the stuff adult ADD is made of. Peter’s piles
are particularly emblematic. So many adults with ADD have piles,
little mess-piles, big mess-piles, piles everywhere. They are like a byproduct of the brain’s work. What other people somehow put away,
people with ADD put into piles.
People with ADD also love cars. ADD loves movement. Many
adults with ADD report that their best thinking is done while driving.
And people with ADD love big cities, all big cities but particularly
New York, Las Vegas, and, especially, Los Angeles. ADD might as
well have been invented in Los Angeles.
It is not always as obvious as the examples above. For many adults
ADD is a subtle but definite part of who they are, like a red thread
sewn into a pinstripe suit, changing its look but only visible upon
close inspection. The red thread may be a thread of distractibility, or
of impulsivity, or of disorganization, sewn into a stripe of creativity
or gregariousness or industry. And the treatment may not be to
remove the red thread but rather to change its hue only slightly so
that it enhances rather than clashes with its surroundings.
One woman, for example, found that she needed help only with
technical writing. Since that was a major part of her job, it was
important that she do it well. Prior to her discovering she had ADD,
it was an excruciating chore for her. She could not focus on it, and
the more she tried to focus, the more anxious she became, thus
becoming further distracted. She tried tranquilizers, but they only
sedated her. Coffee helped some, but it also made her jangly. Once
the diagnosis of ADD was made, she tried stimulant medication. It
helped her focus quite definitely, and it had no side effects. She
found that by taking medication a half hour prior to doing her

becoming further distracted. She tried tranquilizers, but they only
sedated her. Coffee helped some, but it also made her jangly. Once
the diagnosis of ADD was made, she tried stimulant medication. It
helped her focus quite definitely, and it had no side effects. She
found that by taking medication a half hour prior to doing her

writing it went much more smoothly for her. She didn’t need the
medication for anything else.
To give another brief example: A man was having problems getting
along with other people. It was nothing blatant, but he could sense
that people pulled away from him. He could feel it even as it
happened, as he was talking to someone and the conversation went
bland. Although he felt it happening, he was not aware of what
specifically he was doing. It turned out that he had mild ADD, the
most problematic manifestation of which was an inability to observe
his own behavior and to gauge correctly the responses of other
people. This made him appear quite self-centered or indifferent. In
fact, his problem was in paying attention, in noticing the subtle cues
social fluency depends upon and in regulating his own responses.
Before leaping into the psychodynamic realm to explain such “selfcentered” behavior, it is worthwhile to check at the doorway of
attention. Are the lights on? Is the individual neurologically able to
notice the particulars of human interaction, from voice tone to body
language, to timing, to irony, and so forth? In this man’s case he
needed some coaching and role-playing to learn how to tune into
what he was missing. In treating his hidden ADD, his interpersonal
life improved greatly.
These are a few of the areas in which mild ADD may interfere with
an adult’s life: underachievement; reading one’s interpersonal world
accurately; getting started on a creative project, or finishing it;
staying with emotions long enough to work them out; getting
organized; getting rid of perseverative, negative thinking; slowing
down; finding the time to do what one has always wanted to do; or
getting a handle on certain compulsive types of behavior.
Taking stock of oneself in terms of attention and cognitive style is
not the aim of most adult introspection. We are more geared to think
in terms of who likes whom, or who dislikes who else, or why did our
families do this or that, or how can we deal with this fear or that. We

analyze ourselves through stories and we quickly jump into the plot.
We think of this person or that and we have bits of conversation and
we move ourselves along in the scene, from one scene to the next,
often quite painfully, but usually as part of a story with a plot. But
ADD precedes the plot. It adjusts the lighting and sets the stage. If
the lighting is too low or significant props are missing from the stage,
the story cannot be fully comprehended. Before getting the story
going, before developing the plot lines of one’s ongoing narrative of
introspection, it is worthwhile to have a lighting specialist and a
propman check the stage out.
Finding out that you have ADD in adulthood is a bit startling.
These kinds of conditions, one supposes, are supposed to be sorted
out during childhood. After that, you make do with the brain you
have, with the lighting you’ve been wired with. You don’t expect at,
say, age forty, to be told you have a learning disorder or that you
have ADD. You don’t expect to get therapy to help you read and

These kinds of conditions, one supposes, are supposed to be sorted
out during childhood. After that, you make do with the brain you
have, with the lighting you’ve been wired with. You don’t expect at,
say, age forty, to be told you have a learning disorder or that you
have ADD. You don’t expect to get therapy to help you read and
study better, to learn your way around the stage.
The diagnosis gets made by circuitous routes. With children school
should act as a kind of diagnostic screening center for the various
learning problems. But adults have no such center. Rare is the
workplace that would consider an evaluation for ADD in an
employee who was erratic, underachieving, and inattentive. Rare is
the spouse who would counter her husband’s flight into distraction
by saying, “Honey, have you ever considered you might have ADD?”
Adults, by and large, have to stumble into the diagnosis, by word of
mouth, by reading a chance article, or by hearing about it through a
child.
A common scenario in my office goes as follows. A set of parents
makes an appointment for an evaluation for their son or daughter.
After I complete the evaluation, while I’m meeting with the child and
parents together to go over the findings, one parent, usually the
father, clears his throat and asks, in as businesslike a tone as
possible, “Umm, doctor, tell me, do you ever see ADD in, uh, adults?

I mean, can that ever happen?” Since ADD is genetically carried, it is
not unusual for one parent to have it as well as the child.
But when there is no direct connection through a child to a
clinician treating ADD, adults are on their own. In the medical
community and the mental-health fields, knowledge of adult ADD is
not widespread. As our awareness of the disorder increases, this will
change. But for now, looking for help, as an adult, can be a
frustrating and time-consuming process. At the end of this book we
will list some places where reliable help can be found.
The people who come to see me are usually referred by other
mental-health professionals. I have seen hundreds of patients over
the past years and have come to appreciate the wide variety that
exists within the one term, adult ADD. The syndrome is even more
heterogeneous in adults than it is in children. Probably a half dozen
clinical syndromes are camouflaged under the one diagnostic
umbrella term, ADD.
Let us take up some more examples. Laura came to see me for the
most common reason anybody goes to see a psychiatrist: she was
unhappy. There was no acute problem, and she was not bitterly
unhappy. She did feel chronically anxious, and she complained of a
vague feeling of despair. “Despair isn’t usually vague,” I said.
“It’s not in me yet,” she answered, “but it’s out there building, a big
cloud. So I thought I’d come see you first. Before it hits.” Laura was
thirty-two, a minister in a Christian church, married to a baker. They
had two young children. We looked at the most obvious things first.
How was her marriage? Was being a minister too draining? How did
she get along with her congregation? Were the demands of being a
mother weighing too heavily? Were there spiritual problems she’d
been pushing aside? None of these questions turned up much to
worry about. She loved her husband. They started each day in the
bakeshop talking and drinking coffee after the kids had gone off to

she get along with her congregation? Were the demands of being a
mother weighing too heavily? Were there spiritual problems she’d
been pushing aside? None of these questions turned up much to
worry about. She loved her husband. They started each day in the
bakeshop talking and drinking coffee after the kids had gone off to

school. She loved her work and had a loyal congregation. Yes, the
work was draining, but she enjoyed feeling so useful. As for spiritual
matters, her faith in God was strong; it was her faith in herself that
was shaky.
“Well,” I said, “let’s look at the cloud you mentioned when you
came in. Can you describe it? What’s it made of? How did it get
there?”
“It’s a feeling,” she said. “I don’t know how to put it, exactly. It’s a
feeling that my world could collapse. Just fall down all around me.
Sort of like the cartoon character who’s run out over the cliff and his
legs are still pumping, but he’s only standing on air and he’s about to
fall a long, long way down. I don’t know how I’ve done as much as I
have, and I don’t know how long I can keep it up. I ascribe my
success to the grace of God, but I’m still left with this feeling that it
could all be taken away.”
“Is there any reason you can think of that it should?” I asked. “Is
there something you feel particularly guilty about?”
“No more than my everyday crimes,” she answered with a smile.
“No, it’s not guilt. It’s insecurity. A feeling of being a fraud. Not a
fraud, really, because I know I’m not deliberately faking anything.
It’s as if I woke up one day and I was at this grand ball, but I don’t
know how I got there, and I don’t know how I’ll carry it off.”
Laura and I spent several sessions looking at this feeling of
insecurity from many different angles—from her childhood history,
from her religious perspective, from dreams and fantasies and
whatever other unconscious material we could garner, and we came
up with a lot of interesting information but nothing that seemed to
explain the cloud she felt on her horizon.
But then we started to look into her educational history and her
struggles with academic achievement. She always did very well, was
always at or near the top of her class through high school, college,

and seminary. That was why she didn’t mention anything about it in
our first interviews; she had done so well she thought there was no
problem there. But now she told me academics had always been a
struggle for her. Just thinking about it brought back fears, fears of
failing, of not getting things in on time, of being rejected. Each paper
had been an ordeal. She wouldn’t start until the last minute, and she
wouldn’t finish until the deadline. She had an abiding sense of
having to strain to get it, whatever it was, as if she were nearsighted
and had to strain to see the blackboard. “I began to worry about
everything,” she said. “That’s where the insecurity started.”
“When?” I asked.
“College. No, high school. Senior year, junior year, maybe.
Whenever things got hard.”
Without the perspective of ADD, Laura’s history would make one
think of a perfectionist personality, which indeed she did have, and a
diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder or some kind of anxiety
state. But if she had ADD as the starting point of these problems,
with the anxiety and perfectionism occurring in the wake of ADD,
that would cast a new light on things.
After she graduated from seminary and found a congregation and

diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder or some kind of anxiety
state. But if she had ADD as the starting point of these problems,
with the anxiety and perfectionism occurring in the wake of ADD,
that would cast a new light on things.
After she graduated from seminary and found a congregation and
got married, she thought the troubling years had been put to rest.
But the feelings came back in other ways. Organizing the family
became a major task. Her husband helped, but she always fretted she
was going to forget something or overlook an important detail. Old
feelings of incompetence and insecurity surrounded her. She
developed a habit of anxiety that she could not let go of.
“I want to let go of it,” she said, “but I don’t dare. I pray to let go of
it, to feel bold and confident, but I don’t dare. I have an image of
letting go of it, my worry, as if I were leaning over the stern of a
rowboat and watching a big heavy weight sink slowly to the bottom,
out of sight.”

“Back into the unconscious,” I said.
“No,” she said. “Gone forever. When I lean over that boat, kneeling
on the seat in the stern, I let go of the weight and it is gone forever. I
can see it sinking away from me and it feels wonderful. I can let go of
it in my fantasy—why can’t I do it in real life?”
“Well,” I said, “maybe you literally can’t. Maybe your brain won’t
let you because of the way it’s wired.”
We explored the subject of ADD, and then we got some testing
done. While there is no definitive “test” for ADD, what testing can do
is help confirm the diagnosis and/or elucidate any associated
learning disabilities or other hidden emotional issues. The testing
itself involved a few hours of paper-and-pencil tests—tests of
cognitive style, attention span, memory, organizational style, specific
aptitudes, mood, and a neurological examination. Although testing is
not always necessary, when it is done, it usually adds solid
information to the often ambiguous diagnostic process.
Based upon her history and the results of the testing, Laura did
indeed have adult ADD. “I think what you’ve been doing, Laura, is
working so hard most of your life to stave off chaos that you’ve
developed a habit of doing it with worry. You use one toxic state to
stave off another. You’re right when you say you can’t let go of the
worry, of the weight. In a way, it’s been your lifeline. Your brain
won’t let it go.”
With treatment for ADD, Laura gradually began to gain a surer
sense of who she was. She began to believe that she didn’t wake up at
the ball one day, that there was some continuity and logic to her
being where she was. The treatment, which included both
medication and psychotherapy, did not eradicate the threat posed by
the cloud, but it did give Laura greater control over it.
We also worked on letting go of the weight, leaning over the
rowboat, in fantasy, in psychotherapy, letting the weight go,

being where she was. The treatment, which included both
medication and psychotherapy, did not eradicate the threat posed by
the cloud, but it did give Laura greater control over it.
We also worked on letting go of the weight, leaning over the
rowboat, in fantasy, in psychotherapy, letting the weight go,

watching it fall. Laura would watch, and describe it to me as it grew
smaller to her eyes before disappearing into the depth of the water.
She practiced being rid of the weight. At first it was scary. We talked
through the fantasy over and over again, dozens of times, but
gradually the weight did subside and take on proportions that most
people carry every day.
The next example involves a man who didn’t think he was seeking
help for himself. Douglas and his wife Melanie came to see me for an
evaluation of their son, a marvelously imaginative first-grader who
had been seriously ill the year before. I thought their son was doing
fine, but during the course of the evaluation some problems emerged
in Douglas and Melanie’s marriage that they wanted to talk about.
Most of the problems in the marriage, at least as initially
expressed, centered around Douglas. He had bothersome mood
swings. He drank a lot, perhaps a bottle of wine a day. He worked, as
a stockbroker, with great intensity, and achieved significant financial
success, making well into the six-figure realm every year. He had
trouble with bosses, but he was so good at his job that his bosses let
him work pretty much on his own. Before becoming a broker, he was
a jazz musician, and he still took to composing with an attitude little
short of rapture. He also loved to cook, and would give dinner parties
every chance he could. The father of two children, he tried to be as
involved as possible with his kids. The time he had left for Melanie
wasn’t much, but it would have been enough, she felt, if he were
really there during that time. Instead, at any moment, he could
disappear, literally. In the time it took to turn one’s head, he’d be
gone, gone off in pursuit of some new project, some new idea, some
greater stimulation.
Melanie felt that Douglas had a problem with intimacy and was
using alcohol to treat his malaise. Douglas felt that he just wanted
some space and some freedom to be himself, to compose his music,
drink his wine, cook his food, and think his thoughts. He

acknowledged he could be difficult, but he said he was working on
this.
In going back and taking more history from Douglas, it became
clear that, whatever else he had, he surely did have ADD. All the
symptoms of ADD of the intensity-seeking type were there: creative
male, high energy, restless, distractible, impulsive, seeking
stimulation in many ways, engaging at times, at times evanescent,
moody, independent, and anxious when left without structure and
routine.
After I explained to Douglas and Melanie what ADD was, there
was a pause in the room. The couple looked at each other, then broke
out in laughter. “That’s me!” Douglas said. “You have me down to a
T!”
Melanie leaned over and patted her husband’s knee. “You mean
there’s a name for all the stuff you pull? Honey, there’s hope?” Then
she looked at me. “There is something we can do for this?”
“Yes, I think so,” I said. “But first, let’s talk some more.”
Such was their curiosity and excitement, the appointment took the
time of two sessions. Afterward, Douglas wrote me a letter, which I

there’s a name for all the stuff you pull? Honey, there’s hope?” Then
she looked at me. “There is something we can do for this?”
“Yes, I think so,” I said. “But first, let’s talk some more.”
Such was their curiosity and excitement, the appointment took the
time of two sessions. Afterward, Douglas wrote me a letter, which I
excerpt here. “A theory of behavior,” he began,
is only a good metaphor as long as it allows you to explain a
whole raft of activities as stemming from the theory. I have to
tell you that your description of me as “classic” ADD has been
a particularly useful metaphor for me. In fact, coming upon it
has provided me with one of the most singular experiences of
my entire life, because all of a sudden there are an enormous
(on the order of 1,000+ instances) number of moments in my
life which make sense to me now, and didn’t before, as a
consequence of your providing me with this metaphor.
He then went on to write of some of these problems.

I had always done well in English, but I remember realizing
one day that I couldn’t “comprehend” what I was reading in
one of the lessons well enough to be able to answer any of the
questions. I remember going over and over the same bit and
not having it stick any better the fifth time than the first. So,
for really the only time in my life, I cheated and found the
answer sheet.… I can now recall the feeling of complete
confusion I felt with the assignments. I have continued to feel
that way at various other times in my life. Even now I have an
inordinately hard time reading, especially for someone who
makes his living absorbing written documents. I have had my
glasses and contact lens prescriptions changed at least three
times apiece in the last three years in an attempt to “fix” my
reading problem, which essentially involves starting to read a
page, getting through about three lines with comprehension,
then all of a sudden finding myself at the bottom of the page
not recalling any of the words I just read.
At the end of my junior year in high school, having never
really attended study hall or anything of the sort, and
following my third straight year of A+ grades, I made a
conscious decision that “if they thought that was good, getting
my grades, wait until I really turn on the after burners in my
senior year.” I decided to attend study halls and really apply
myself in order to insure my acceptance into Harvard. I really
did work harder that year than I ever had before, but I got, for
example, a 50 percent on my midyear exam in math, having
never got less than a 90 percent in my life. I also completely
blew history and couldn’t remember anything from any of my
lessons, and essentially screwed up the entire year in every
course except creative writing. Even now I have dreams which
involve finding myself in prep school, and all of a sudden
realizing I hadn’t graduated because I had blown all those
courses so badly.

blew history and couldn’t remember anything from any of my
lessons, and essentially screwed up the entire year in every
course except creative writing. Even now I have dreams which
involve finding myself in prep school, and all of a sudden
realizing I hadn’t graduated because I had blown all those
courses so badly.

I had a similar experience in graduate school in music,
where I wrote a lot of music for other students and dedicated
the pieces to them. I was asked by a French horn player if I
could write a piece for her recital in seven or eight months’
time. In all previous cases I did it on my own time, and
invariably got the thing done in less than a month. But in this
case the pressure associated with her commission totally froze
me. I was never able even to begin to write the piece, much
less finish it.
These examples of what I would term “random failure” were
incredibly unnerving to me and contributed to a sense I had of
myself (and probably still do have) that every success I had
prior to that moment was proven, by that moment, to have
been a sham, and a fake, and a hoax on everyone including
me, which led me to the inevitable question, “Why don’t you
just admit that you are of limited intelligence, even less vision,
and give up?” For some reason, I didn’t.
I have had any number of subsequent occurrences where,
under some sort of pressure, I have, for varying periods of
time, lost the ability to concentrate completely, and fallen into
fairly significant depressions whose main characteristic is this
self-flagellation. My wife, Melanie, finds this behavior the
toughest of all my “foibles” to deal with because there is
essentially no answer she has been able to find to get me out. I
always feel as if describing how I feel and think about myself
is too complicated; it’s as if I can hear the whole conversation
in advance and I know all of the twists and turns it will take
before they happen, so why bother? The effort just isn’t worth
it. So, when Melanie asks me in these moods if there is
anything she can say or do, she is met with an impatient
“Thanks, but no thanks.” As a consequence, she has felt totally
disconnected from me for sustained periods of time. I will, in
those periods, come home and sit down in front of the TV and
watch the news or listen to music late into the night, unable to

speak more than monosyllabically with anyone in my family. I
always thought my attention to that TV was the result of my
intense interest in current events, but it’s pretty clear to me
now that when I was feeling overwhelmed, going to sit in my
favorite chair in my habitual spot in our living room had a
salutary effect on my state of mind—it helped break the state
of negative hyperfocus I’d fallen into—regardless of the
content of the news that night.
And when I haven’t been depressed during these periods, I
have become a stimulation hound. When I was down, I started
smoking again, I went out to hear a lot of loud electric blues
several nights a week, I drank more, etc. Melanie thought this
was all the behavior of a basically decadent person who had
sort of lost it, but for me it was very clearly a need to achieve
some centeredness by “going for the gusto.”
More recently, I was working as an analyst for a particularly
difficult man in New York, and one afternoon, before Melanie
and I and the kids were supposed to go off for the weekend,
this man, Bob, and I had a very difficult argument, which was

sort of lost it, but for me it was very clearly a need to achieve
some centeredness by “going for the gusto.”
More recently, I was working as an analyst for a particularly
difficult man in New York, and one afternoon, before Melanie
and I and the kids were supposed to go off for the weekend,
this man, Bob, and I had a very difficult argument, which was
simply the latest of a series of serious disagreements. I found
this conversation so unnerving that when Melanie came to
pick me up I was essentially unable to talk for the entire ride
up in the car and for the rest of the evening. That obviously
didn’t go over very well with Melanie, who thought that I
should just “snap out of it.” The next morning I woke up and
we were supposed to go skiing with some friends, and just as I
was about to get on the ski lift, I turned to Melanie and said
that I had to leave. I didn’t just want to leave; I had to leave. I
couldn’t really explain to her or to myself why I had to leave,
but I just knew I couldn’t stay there anymore. As usual, she
found my behavior completely unacceptable, but also knew
there was nothing she could do to stop me. I found a carrental agency thirty miles away and told the people at the
lodge where we were staying that I had a medical emergency

back in Boston so they would have one of their young
employees drive me to this gas station where they had one car
left. I drove back to Boston listening to reports of the
developments in the Iraq-Kuwait war and promptly went to
my office, which had all of the things I needed to get myself
back in a “crisp” or “clear” frame of mind—my computers, my
card files, my IN-box, my calendar, etc. As a consequence, I
was able to find the peace of mind to think about what I
couldn’t think about in the midst of my wife and children and
friends.
It was clear to me when I got back to the office having
driven all of that way, that that was what I needed, but I
couldn’t articulate it. As a matter of fact, I was embarrassed to
articulate it, because both my friends and Melanie have
always made disparaging remarks about how I work on
weekends. But since I have been an adult, first as a composer,
then as a professional in the money business, I have always
needed to be “at my post,” so to speak, for at least some
portion of every day. It keeps me in focus to have a routine to
plug myself in to. But since none of my friends or wife or
children have such a need, they have long regarded such
behavior as changeable, that if I would just relax a little bit, I
wouldn’t need to go to the office, I would see more of my kids,
and everything would be great. Although I love to see my
family and do things together, being a father in the same way
someone without ADD is just isn’t possible because it is very
clear to me I get into panic situations if I don’t have a pretty
strict routine built into my life, which involves a good deal of
alone time, not necessarily quiet, but alone time.
Many of Douglas’s symptoms could be explained by other
diagnoses—anxiety disorder, alcohol abuse, phobic personality,
depressive disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder—but no single
diagnosis explains all the symptoms as well as ADD does. His

strict routine built into my life, which involves a good deal of
alone time, not necessarily quiet, but alone time.
Many of Douglas’s symptoms could be explained by other
diagnoses—anxiety disorder, alcohol abuse, phobic personality,
depressive disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder—but no single
diagnosis explains all the symptoms as well as ADD does. His

reading problem in school is quite typical of ADD. He may have had
dyslexia as well, but his tuning out a few lines into a page is exactly
what you see with ADD. His independence, needing to do things on
his own time, on his own schedule, is also typical of ADD, as is his
frustration intolerance and his sense of being a fraud. His cognitive
failures invalidated all his successes, in his own mind, and his selfesteem plummeted.
We see the same difficulty in tolerating tension interpersonally in
his description of not being able to explain himself to Melanie. “I
always feel as if describing how I feel and think about myself is too
complicated—it’s as if I can hear the whole conversation in advance,
and I know all of the twists and turns it will take before they happen,
so why bother? The effort just isn’t worth it.” It was not that he
couldn’t think it through. He certainly could do that. It was bearing
with the tension of explaining himself that so upset him. The tension
of constructing an explanation, from A to B to C to D, apparently so
simple a task, irritates many people with ADD. While they can hold
the information in mind, they do not have the patience to
sequentially put it out. That is too tedious. They would like to dump
the information in a heap on the floor all at once and have it be
comprehended instantly. Otherwise, as Douglas says, it’s just not
worth the effort. It’s too boring.
Other symptoms are worth noticing. He used intense living and
alcohol to treat depressive moods, and he used structure to relieve
anxiety. His flight home from the skiing trip to the structure of his
office, which in one individual may have represented a problem with
intimacy or in another person a kind of agoraphobia, in Douglas was
a way of quelling the anxiety the unstructured activity at the ski lodge
created.
What of Douglas’s need for structure? In chapter 8, on treatment,
we will stress how important structure can be, and how upsetting its
absence is in children and adults with ADD. Douglas sought
structure regularly, and desperately missed it on his skiing trip.

While we all need external structure in our lives—some degree of
predictability, routine, organization—those with ADD need it much
more than most people. They need external structure so much
because they so lack internal structure. They carry with them a
frightening sense that their world might cave in at any moment. They
often feel on the brink of disaster, as if they were juggling a few more
balls than they’re able to. Their inner world begs for reassurance, for
signposts and guidelines. They need the devices Douglas reached for
in his moment of misery—in his words, “my computers, my card
files, my IN-box, my calendar”—because they feel overwhelmed by
chaos without them. What differentiates their need for structure
from everybody’s ordinary need for it is a matter of degree. They
need it a lot, and they need it often. While someone else might bolt
from the ski slope and rush home to take a medication, or make a
deadline, Douglas rushed home to find his computers and calendars,

chaos without them. What differentiates their need for structure
from everybody’s ordinary need for it is a matter of degree. They
need it a lot, and they need it often. While someone else might bolt
from the ski slope and rush home to take a medication, or make a
deadline, Douglas rushed home to find his computers and calendars,
to find the signposts he had set up to give himself organization and
control. Without these structures, when challenged by open-ended
time, he felt he was coming unhinged. Intuitively, desperately, he
sought out what he needed; he found his best treatment. One can
almost see him settling into his office, reaching for his calendar,
turning on his computer, checking through his IN-box, and imagine
him heaving a sigh of relief as the anxiety subsides from within and
he is calmed by an old friend.
Douglas shows us how he used structure to “treat” himself, but
how does a therapist work structure into an actual treatment
regimen?
The therapist must become active and directive in helping the
patient reorganize his life. Contrary to the practice of psychoanalytic
psychotherapists, the ADD therapist must offer concrete suggestions
concerning ways of getting organized, staying focused, making plans,
keeping to schedules, prioritizing tasks to be done, and, in general,
dealing with the chaos of everyday life. The therapist should not do
this for the patient, but with the patient, so that the patient can learn
to do it for himself.

The therapist might, for example, suggest that the patient buy a
daily organizer, and then go over with the patient how to set it up. Or
the therapist might suggest ways of finding a financial planner, and
then remind the patient to do it until it gets done. This is anathema
to most traditional therapy, but with people with ADD it is essential.
They need direction. They need structure. The therapist should not
tell the patient whom to marry, but the therapist most certainly
should coach the patient on how to get organized for a date.
Douglas knew intuitively about the importance of structure. I can
use myself as another example of someone who knew intuitively that
he needed structure more than most people do. Long before I knew I
had ADD, I realized that I needed special kinds of organizational
aids. In medical school, for example, I relied heavily upon flash cards
to help me master the huge amount of information one must
assimilate during those four years. Particularly during the first two
years of medical school when the basic medical sciences are
presented, I broke down each course into hundreds of index cards.
Each card would contain one or two facts I had to remember. Each
card was manageable, and by focusing on one card at a time, I never
had to deal with the seemingly unmanageable entirety of any one
course. This structuring technique of breaking down large tasks into
small ones—in my case a large course into a series of small index
cards—is a valuable technique for anyone to learn to use, but it is
particularly valuable for those of us who have ADD, because we can
quickly feel overwhelmed by big projects or complex undertakings.
When I learned what ADD was, I realized that I had been effectively
“treating” my ADD throughout my education with various
structuring techniques.
As Douglas learned more about ADD, he also became articulate in
describing his feelings associated with the condition. One of his best

quickly feel overwhelmed by big projects or complex undertakings.
When I learned what ADD was, I realized that I had been effectively
“treating” my ADD throughout my education with various
structuring techniques.
As Douglas learned more about ADD, he also became articulate in
describing his feelings associated with the condition. One of his best
descriptions was the recounting of a dream he had:
Melanie and I were sitting in a chemistry classroom with
twenty or so other students and a fifty-six-year-old professor.

He was furiously writing on the blackboard. He was putting
down a long series of equations, and he was defining the
constants, represented by x, y, and z. He was thinking
carefully.
After a few minutes he turned around and began to engage
all of us, telling us this was about the development of Cizimar.
But he didn’t tell us what Cizimar was, what it was used for, or
why you would want to know how to “develop” it.
He then began to “solve” the series of equations, plugging in
the constants as he went, and in a very short time he arrived
at the answer—zero—and he turned around proudly. Everyone
else in the class looked proud, too.
He then began to talk about the process of solving this
equation, and I asked in a relatively quiet voice, because it was
clear I was the only one who didn’t understand what the point
of all this was, “What is Cizimar and why do we want to
develop it?” But he didn’t hear me because he was quite
worked up about the explanation of everything following the
solution of the equation. I asked again, this time in a louder
voice which got his attention, and he stopped and looked at
me, as did everyone else in the class. He said, “It is used to
balance macadam,” and proceeded down whatever course he
was pursuing. I paused for a second, presuming I could apply
this piece of knowledge and everything would become clear,
but even though I knew what macadam was, I had no idea
why one would want to “balance” it. So I asked, “Why do you
want to balance macadam, or when do you want to balance
macadam?”
It was now clear I was interrupting his train of thought,
along with everyone else’s. But I needed to know what was
going on because it was very frustrating to listen to the
discussion with no idea what it was about. The professor came

over to me, having picked up a spoonlike object from his desk
which was filled with something that looked like oily, black
salt, clearly measured with some precision, and he began to
talk to me—he was standing and I was sitting—in a fairly
severe fashion about how this ladle full of Cizimar, which is an
example of the result of everything he has just explained, is
used in some sort of circumstance to balance macadam. All
the while I was straining to understand what he was going on
about, but it was hopeless. He and everyone else understood,
but I didn’t. So I got up, threw my hands in the air, and said,
“This is stupid, I’m out of here!” and I left the classroom,
knowing that everyone in the room (with the probable
exception of Melanie) thought I was a dunce.
But somewhere in my brain I knew I was not a dunce, even
though right at that moment I felt like one. I thought to leave
the situation for a moment and get some fresh air would solve
the problem.
And the fact is that often in my life it has.
Douglas’s dream is one of the most vivid examples I’ve heard of the
feeling of just not getting it that bedevils so many people with ADD.

though right at that moment I felt like one. I thought to leave
the situation for a moment and get some fresh air would solve
the problem.
And the fact is that often in my life it has.
Douglas’s dream is one of the most vivid examples I’ve heard of the
feeling of just not getting it that bedevils so many people with ADD.
In fact, Douglas was very good at math and chemistry, but
sometimes there were moments, as in the dream, when he didn’t get
it at all—because of his ADD. The sense of growing panic, the feeling
that gibberish is being passed off as coherent conversation, the fear
that the world is engaged in meaningless discourse masquerading as
meaningful exchange—these are the blurry states individuals with
ADD negotiate each day.
While Douglas continued to need his individual therapy—
treatment for ADD does not remove all psychological conflict or pain
—the treatment for his ADD helped both Melanie and him reach a
new place in their lives. Using a combination of couples therapy,

medication, and structure, Douglas learned how to bear with some
tension, how to talk to Melanie about his feelings and how to listen to
Melanie talk to him, and how to plan and anticipate his emotional
needs rather than reacting impulsively to them. As Melanie grew able
to understand much of Douglas’s behavior in the context of ADD, she
became less resentful of him. As Douglas became a better listener
and communicator, someone who could “be there” more, he also
found that he drank less. This was in part due to an effort initially to
please Melanie in recompense for all the hard times he’d caused her,
but more and more it was due to a reduced desire to drink. Melanie
and Douglas are now both doing well.
The next case takes us into the life of a woman who was told from
an early age by her father that she “had no more sense than a
jaybird” and that her main problem was that she was “lazy.”
Although a part of her bristled at these remarks, knowing they were
untrue, another part of her accepted them, took them in, and
incorporated them into her self-image. Now fifty years old, married
with grown children, Sarah has a career as a potter. She came in
from out of town for a consultation because her husband had
discovered he had ADD and Sarah thought many of her symptoms
might be understood in a similar light.
She and her husband, Jeff, arrived, sat down, and immediately
Sarah smiled back tears. “I don’t want to cry. I told myself I wouldn’t
cry,” she said.
“It’s OK to cry in here,” I said. “Maybe you can try to tell me what
the tears are about?”
“It’s been so many years living like this, thinking I’m stupid, but
knowing I’m not. I brought along this list,” she added, holding up
some papers. “I wrote down everything I could so you could read it.”
She handed me the papers, bunched up like a scarf.

“It’s OK to cry in here,” I said. “Maybe you can try to tell me what
the tears are about?”
“It’s been so many years living like this, thinking I’m stupid, but
knowing I’m not. I brought along this list,” she added, holding up
some papers. “I wrote down everything I could so you could read it.”
She handed me the papers, bunched up like a scarf.

The first item on the list referred to a cough drop. As I read it, I
asked her about it.
“Oh,” she answered, “that is about a cough drop someone left on
the dashboard of our car. The other day I saw the cough drop and
thought, I’ll have to throw that away. When I arrived at my first stop,
I forgot to take the cough drop to a trash can. When I got back into
the car, I saw it and thought, I’ll throw it away at the gas station. The
gas station came and went and I hadn’t thrown the cough drop away.
Well, the whole day went like that, the cough drop still sitting on the
dashboard. When I got home, I thought, I’ll take it inside with me
and throw it out. In the time it took me to open the car door, I forgot
about the cough drop. It was there to greet me when I got in the car
the next morning. Jeff was with me. I looked at the cough drop and
burst into tears. Jeff asked me why I was crying, and I told him it was
because of the cough drop. He thought I was losing my mind. ‘But
you don’t understand,’ I said, ‘my whole life is like that. I see
something that I mean to do and then I don’t do it. It’s not only
trivial things like the cough drop; it’s big things, too.’ That’s why I
cried.”
It was such a classic ADD story that I’ve come to call it the “cough
drop sign” when a person habitually has trouble following through
on plans on a minute-to-minute, even second-to-second, basis. This
is not due to procrastination per se as much as it is due to the
busyness of the moment interrupting or interfering with one’s
memory circuits. You can get up from your chair, go into the kitchen
to get a glass of water, and then in the kitchen forget the reason for
your being there. Or, on a larger scale, the most important item on
your agenda for a given day might be to make a certain telephone
call, a call that, say, has crucial business consequences. You mean to
do it, you want to do it, you are not afraid of doing it, indeed you are
eager to make the call and feel confident about doing it. And yet, as
the day progresses, you never get around to making the call. An
invisible shield of procrastination seems to separate you from the
task. You sharpen your pencil instead, talk to an associate, pay some

bills, have lunch, get interrupted by a minor problem, return some
other calls to clear your desk so you can make the important call,
only to find that the end of the day has come and the call still has not
been made. Or, on an interpersonal level, you may mean to bring
home flowers to your spouse, have it in mind to do it all day, really
want to do it, in fact on the subway home envision just which florist
shop you will stop at, only to find yourself standing in front of your
spouse, saying “Hi, honey” with no flowers in hand. Sometimes this
is due to unconsciously not wanting to buy the flowers. But
sometimes, far more often than most people realize, it is due to ADD.
Wanting to do something, meaning to do something, but just not
doing it: this is the “cough drop sign” and it is common among adults
with ADD.
The rest of Sarah’s list of symptoms read as if lifted from a text on

is due to unconsciously not wanting to buy the flowers. But
sometimes, far more often than most people realize, it is due to ADD.
Wanting to do something, meaning to do something, but just not
doing it: this is the “cough drop sign” and it is common among adults
with ADD.
The rest of Sarah’s list of symptoms read as if lifted from a text on
ADD:
Daydreamed a lot in class as a child.
Called “lazy” and “no more sense than a jaybird” by my father.
Got 730 on the verbal college boards but couldn’t get my papers
in on time so got C’s in English.
Like novelty, lots of changing interests.
Have lots of ideas but have a hard time structuring things so they
actually happen.
Desk cluttered.
Forgetful.
Often have a hard time finding the right word so impulsively say
any word or just stay silent and feel stupid.

Work best in a framework: things need to fit into the whole
picture. Feel like I’m always looking for a structure.
Difficult to walk a straight line—tend to veer into things or
people.
Have always felt that I think differently from most people.
Unless I’m very involved, usually get sleepy during lectures.
Handwriting: sometimes I write things I don’t mean to; skip
letters or form them wrong.
Bathroom cleaning on Sat.: look at job, feel overwhelmed. Turn
on radio to get me going. Find the music irritating later and turn
it off. Remember the job and tackle it, then it goes all right. Often
I feel like I have to push through a wall to get into a job.
No matter how organized I try to be, I always mess up!
Stream-of-consciousness way of doing housework—hop from this
to that with no apparent logic, just a schedule.
Always trying to organize things, but it doesn’t come easily. If I
don’t organize them, I won’t know where they are.
Lose what’s in my head very easily.
Organize my life around projects. They give me something to
think about.
Feel that I have to push myself all the time, especially getting into
things.
Like things simple—early music, not romantic.
Weed the garden, remove the clutter. I like to do that.

Problem with lateness. Even when there is plenty of time, I fill it
up and then cut things too close or lose track of the time. I don’t
have a sense of the passing of time.
Inwardly feel desperate. Reassurances from other people don’t
help. There is something inside that needs to change.
Doors and drawers—never close them after myself, then come
back and see them and close them.
Inside, I feel like I’m saying, “I’m not stupid!”
Easily hurt and rejected.
Don’t clean up after myself well. Get overwhelmed by a large
confused mess.
General problems with distractibility and disorganization.
Most at peace when I’m doing something with my hands like
gardening or pottery.
After I read through Sarah’s list, I asked her how she composed it.
“Jeff took notes and I just spoke it out. What do you think?”
“I think,” I said, “that your list could serve as a pamphlet on adult
ADD. Running through it, just about everything here fits the picture.
But there’s more, of course.”
There is always more. The problem is almost never just ADD,
especially in adults. Sarah’s problems—her sense of being desperate
and different, her feeling that “there is something inside that needs
to change”—these problems were caused by more than just ADD.
However, the most successful treatment of them must take ADD into
account. Sarah needed to address her issues of insecurity, her

especially in adults. Sarah’s problems—her sense of being desperate
and different, her feeling that “there is something inside that needs
to change”—these problems were caused by more than just ADD.
However, the most successful treatment of them must take ADD into
account. Sarah needed to address her issues of insecurity, her
feelings about the cruel treatment she received from her father, and

her sense of being different. In addressing those issues, she would do
best by also understanding how ADD was complicating the picture.
We started medication, but Sarah did not benefit from it at first.
She did, however, benefit a great deal just from getting the diagnosis
and the knowledge of what ADD is and how it explained many of her
symptoms. She also benefited from the practical tips I gave her on
the nonmedication management of the disorder. A complete list of
these tips is included in chapter 8, but I will mention here some that
particularly helped Sarah:
1. Consider joining or starting a support group.
2. Try to get rid of the negativity that has infested your system.
3. Make copious use of external structure: lists, reminders, files,
daily rituals, and the like.
4. When it comes to paperwork, use the principle of O.H.I.O.:
Only Handle It Once.
5. Make deadlines.
6. Do what you are good at, instead of spending all your time
trying to get good at what you’re bad at.
7. Understand mood changes and ways to manage these.
8. Expect depression after success.
9. Learn how to advocate for yourself. Adults with ADD are so
used to being criticized that they are often unnecessarily
defensive in putting their own case forward.
10. Learn to joke with yourself and others about your various
symptoms. If you can learn to be relaxed enough about the whole

syndrome to be able to joke about it, others will forgive you much
more easily.
In addition to making the diagnosis and offering education and
practical tips, I also referred Sarah to a psychotherapist in her part of
the country and agreed to serve as a consultant via the telephone
should the need arise. After she went home, I made an adjustment to
her medication in search of the right regimen. I had originally started
her on the antidepressant desipramine because, unlike the
stimulants, it only needs to be taken once a day creating an effect
that is often more even than that of the stimulants, which have to be
taken several times a day. I started her on a very low dose, 20
milligrams (mg) per day, but that had little effect. There is some
controversy as to what dosage of desipramine one should give. The
usual dosage for depression is between 100 and 300 mg per day.
However, I have found that considerably lower doses are often
effective for ADD. Since lower doses produce fewer side effects, I
usually start at a low dose—10 to 20 mg per day. I raise the dose
gradually. When I increased Sarah’s dose to 40 mg per day, she
noticed considerable improvement, which she discusses below. Once
the medication was set and Sarah had been in counseling for a while,
I got the following letter.
Dear Dr. Hallowell,
I would like to fill you in on how the medication has been
helping me.
The adjustment you made with the medication has
produced much more noticeable results: In general, I feel
much more relaxed, more positive, and more on an even keel
emotionally. I am also less confused. I didn’t know that I was
confused before, but I think that that was one of the reasons

helping me.
The adjustment you made with the medication has
produced much more noticeable results: In general, I feel
much more relaxed, more positive, and more on an even keel
emotionally. I am also less confused. I didn’t know that I was
confused before, but I think that that was one of the reasons
that I avoided conflict and have been tense in social situations.
I couldn’t think or respond quickly under stress. I feel now

that it is more possible to engage with people, and that in
conflict situations, I have more of a chance to know and say
how I feel. This is not to say that I am great at it, but it is
definitely better.
I am less threatened by erratic and unpredictable people.
My desk and work areas are not as messy, and it is easier for
me to put things in order. They still are not what they should
be, but at least I’m making some progress.…
I have more energy in the evenings and am able to think
more clearly. In general, I am having more fun.
My husband says that I am more steady, less jumpy and
controlling, and more involved in general conversation.
The only side effect that I have noticed is that I don’t sleep
as soundly. I don’t stay awake, though, so I can live with it.
The tips on nonmedication management have been very
helpful in keeping me on track. I reread them every so often.
I have been thinking more about the issue of my father: the
last I wrote to you was that I couldn’t imagine wanting a
relationship with a father. Since then I have noticed that I
have a desire to relate to some of the older “father figures” in
my life, ones that are somewhat of a kindred spirit to me. And,
probably, as I rethink it, my father, his sister, and my sister
have ADD or something like it.
A while back I dreamed I was in the house I grew up in. I
was furiously angry at a woman who has been somewhat like
an older sister to me. She is a very efficient person who can
keep track of ten things at once. I think that she represented
my mother, who cared for me but didn’t understand me.

Perhaps the greatest benefit that has come since discovering
that my husband and I have ADD is that we can understand
each other. Previously, I felt that my friends understood me
much more than he did. Since finding out about ADD and
getting treatment, he is much happier, more productive, more
accepting of himself, and easier to talk to. He used to be like a
machine that tried to give answers; now I feel that he is the
person who understands me the most.
As in children, ADD in adults occurs on a wide spectrum. There
are severe cases of adult ADD, where the individual can barely
function at all due to rampant disorganization, or uncontrollable
impulsivity, or a complete inability to follow through on anything. In
addition, the person may be disabled by secondary symptoms of low
self-esteem or depression. On the other hand, there are very mild
cases of ADD where the symptoms are hardly noticeable at all.
Mild cases can go undetected even by people who know of the
disorder. The symptoms can be quite subtle, or they can be masked,
as we will discuss in the chapter on diagnosis, by other symptoms, or
the individual can have adapted so well that there appears to be no
problem.
I have treated a number of cases of adult ADD where I only
discovered the disorder late in the treatment of some other problem.
For instance, I had been seeing a highly successful businessman for

as we will discuss in the chapter on diagnosis, by other symptoms, or
the individual can have adapted so well that there appears to be no
problem.
I have treated a number of cases of adult ADD where I only
discovered the disorder late in the treatment of some other problem.
For instance, I had been seeing a highly successful businessman for
five years in supportive psychotherapy before realizing that he had
mild ADD. Bernie had been seeing me once a month or so to discuss
worries and concerns that would come up in his busy life. He used
me as a confidant, bringing up concerns with me that he wanted kept
confidential but lay outside the purview of a business consultant. The
matters had to do with his perceptions of his competitors, how he
sized them up, how they treated him, what his thoughts were about
the business world in general, and what his fears were in particular.
Our work together seemed to have nothing to do with ADD, nothing

to do with focusing attention, or regulating impulses, or containing
restlessness, or dealing with procrastination or disorganization or
any of the other usual concerns one hears from people with ADD.
What we had set up was an unusual, but in Bernie’s case effective,
model for getting some psychological support. It was only when we
were talking about one of his children, some five years into our
relationship, that I mentioned what the symptoms of ADD are. We
looked at each other for a moment and had the same thought: Have
we been missing something?
Although he was not disabled by ADD, Bernie did indeed have
symptoms of distractibility, impulsivity, and moodiness that
bothered him. He would frequently tune out at meetings, find
himself unable to listen to a telephone conversation even when he
wanted to, tangle himself up with patterns of procrastination and
overcommitment, and find himself getting angry and irascible
without provocation. Once he got started on stimulant medication—
Ritalin, 10 mg, three times per day—these symptoms abated. His
level of productivity soared, leaving him shaking his head in
amazement. “I get more done in a morning now than I used to in a
week,” he said. Since he was an intuitive and resourceful man, he had
been treating his ADD without knowing it by the strategic use of
structure and by delegating to others what he hated to do, or could
not do. “But,” he said, “now with the medication I feel more focused
and organized than ever before.”
I felt rather foolish, a specialist in ADD, not noticing the symptoms
of ADD in a man I saw once a month for five years. My problem was
that I had closed my diagnostic book, so to speak, on Bernie. As we
settled into our regular conversations, I stopped thinking
diagnostically. Only the mention of the symptoms of his child luckily
reopened the book. It was a striking lesson to me of how what we see
depends so much upon the context. Here I was, a professional highly
and specifically trained to notice the symptoms of attention deficit
disorder, sitting with a man for years who had many of those
symptoms, and I didn’t see them. It was because I wasn’t ready to

reopened the book. It was a striking lesson to me of how what we see
depends so much upon the context. Here I was, a professional highly
and specifically trained to notice the symptoms of attention deficit
disorder, sitting with a man for years who had many of those
symptoms, and I didn’t see them. It was because I wasn’t ready to

notice. The context in which I saw Bernie defined him as someone
who did not have ADD. So, even though the symptoms were staring
me in the face, I didn’t see them. I wager that I wouldn’t see them in
a close friend, or even my wife, again due to the context.
Most adults with ADD need the fresh look I withheld from Bernie
for so long because I’d already made up my mind about him. That’s
the problem with being an adult: people have already made up their
minds about us; we’ve even made up our minds about ourselves.
That makes it terribly difficult to get the radical reappraisal that
something like making the diagnosis of ADD requires.
Most cases are more severe than Bernie’s. But at the same time,
most people who have adult ADD aren’t floundering. Many
successful people have it. It is particularly common among creative
people—artists, actors, writers—scientists, people in high-energy or
high-risk jobs, and people who work on their own.
I recently treated a physician, let’s call him Joshua, who came to
see me for the treatment of depression. He was a man in his fifties, a
tall, burly gentleman with a salt-and-pepper beard and a hills-ofTennessee accent. I didn’t know what that was, until he told me.
“You sound southern,” I had said.
“Hills of Tennessee,” he said. “One of the many southern dialects.”
He was a warm, friendly man, trained as a general surgeon, but
now practicing as a consultant. “When medicine stopped being
medicine and became paperwork, I got out,” he said. “I’m doing fine
professionally. And my marriage is good. I’m just not living the life I
know I could. I’m not on top of things. I’m not being as creative as I
want to be. Maybe I have no right to be, but I think there’s more to
me than has come out so far. I don’t know if you can help me or not.
I’m depressed, but then I’ve been depressed on and off my whole life.
I was alcoholic for a long time, but I quit twenty-one years ago.”
“How did you quit?” I asked.

He smiled, as if humoring all the various movements that purport
to help people with addictions. “The only way that would work for
me. Cold turkey. I just stopped one day. I could see it was going to
kill me—or worse, kill one of my patients. Can’t say I don’t miss it,
but I’ll never drink again. Anyway, the depression got a little better
after I stopped drinking, but I still have these moods. Black,
interminable moods where all I can think of is what a rotten,
worthless man I am.”
“You start in on yourself,” I said.
“Boy, do I ever. I’ll just have at me, call myself every name in the
book and then some, go over and over all my failings, and show no
mercy. You know, I can talk about it now like I’m talking about a
symptom, but when I’m in it, I’m death. I’ll just brood for hours,
even a day. I can still function, I can still work, but there’s this
relentless voice carping away at me inside. My wife can’t make it
stop, nobody can. I’ve seen a number of psychiatrists, and I’ve taken
just about every antidepressant medication there is, but nothing
works. Maybe it’s just my Southern Baptist roots come back to haunt

even a day. I can still function, I can still work, but there’s this
relentless voice carping away at me inside. My wife can’t make it
stop, nobody can. I’ve seen a number of psychiatrists, and I’ve taken
just about every antidepressant medication there is, but nothing
works. Maybe it’s just my Southern Baptist roots come back to haunt
me and I’ll have to live with it.” He raised an eyebrow as if to put a
question mark at the end of his sentence, where his tone of voice had
left a period.
“I don’t know,” I said. “Let’s try and find out more about these
moods.”
After taking a lengthy history, I realized there was more to the
story than just the problem with bad moods. Joshua’s dark periods
were not typical of depression; they were not full of listlessness,
hopelessness, and pessimism. He did not lose sleep or stop working
or withdraw from the world as so many depressed people do. Rather,
he actively brooded within himself, carrying on an internal
monologue like a preacher from the pulpit about the extent of his

sins. He never thought of suicide, nor, even, did he lose hope for the
future.
On the other hand, he gave ample evidence of ADD from childhood
on, compensated for with structure and determination. “You know,”
I said, “I think it might be useful to look at your depression from
another vantage point. Let’s consider it as a kind of pernicious
variation in your way of paying attention. You lose perspective.
Instead of paying attention evenly, you hyperfocus on everything
negative. This happens subtly, but profoundly. The next thing you
know some mad preacher within you has started to harangue at you
and you can’t stop listening. What this adds up to in terms of a
diagnosis, combined with everything else you’ve told me, is that I
think you may have the adult version of attention deficit disorder.”
“You mean what hyperactive kids get?” he asked skeptically.
“Yes,” I said. “But you have the kind that especially affects mood.
You organize around a bad mood and you don’t let go. You hold on to
it for dear life. You don’t dare give it up for fear that chaos will
replace it.”
Something I said caught his attention. His eyes focused on an
upper corner of my ceiling, and he mused, “I organize around a bad
mood. Interesting idea. Say more.”
While the earlier example of Laura centered around anxiety as the
chief symptom, in Joshua what was most troubling was the
perseverative, negative thinking. I explained to him about ADD with
anxiety and depression. It made sense to him. “You mean,” he said,
“my mind may fall into one of these ruminative cycles, as you call
them, like a muskrat walking into a trap? Snap! The trap shuts, and
the muskrat can’t get free. That’s how it feels to me, because I’m
struggling all the time. I’ve been calling it depression because it hurts
so much, but it’s more of a fight than a depression, now that you
mention it.”

“my mind may fall into one of these ruminative cycles, as you call
them, like a muskrat walking into a trap? Snap! The trap shuts, and
the muskrat can’t get free. That’s how it feels to me, because I’m
struggling all the time. I’ve been calling it depression because it hurts
so much, but it’s more of a fight than a depression, now that you
mention it.”

“Exactly,” I said. “Usually, you organize around a task or a
schedule or some other logical schema. But when you happen into
one of these traps, you organize around worry and self-contempt. If
you can ignore the content of the ruminations, hard as that may be to
do, and look instead at the process of ruminating, it may become
easier to wriggle free of the trap. Instead of engaging in the
argument, instead of answering back to the preacher in the pulpit,
you need to ignore him. And the only way you can do that is by
leaving his church. Go for a run. Call someone on the telephone.
Write a letter. Turn on loud music. Whatever works to shift your
focus off of this sermon of self-hatred and onto something else, do
that. When you’re in one of those moods, it is not the time for
introspection. Beware the preacher because he is beguiling. Because
you’re intelligent and you like words, and you grew up in a strict
moral framework, when you hear arguments mounted against you
you can hardly resist answering back. But once you join in, the
preacher has you. You cannot win. The preacher will always have the
last word. In those moods, you can never stare him down.”
“You’re right,” my patient said, then added with a wry smile, “you
speak so convincingly about it that you sound like you’ve been there
yourself.”
“Well,” I said, “let’s just say I’ve heard an awful lot of people talk
about it.”
“And the other symptoms, what are they?”
“Well, you mentioned your history of drinking, and you talked
about how much you procrastinate, how you usually have too much
going on, how you can’t get organized, how you overwork as a way of
getting stimulated, how much you are putting off, your writing for
example, because you can’t get started—these could all be due to
ADD.”

Once we had the diagnosis confirmed, we agreed upon a course of
treatment. After we started medication—Ritalin—and had a few more
sessions to develop insight into his situation, he improved
remarkably. He found that he started to really like his work. He
noticed what was going on. Most of all, the black moods ceased. He
could still feel unhappy, but not in the bone-crushing way as before.
“I’ve learned how to walk out of that preacher’s way,” he said. “I can
see the scowl on his face and I laugh.” He used the concept of
organizing around depression and anxiety as a means of fighting his
tendency to do so. The medication helped both with focusing and
with his moods. As focusing and organization became less of a chore,
he found that work became more settled, freeing him up to start
some projects he had been putting off. Like many people who
discover in adulthood that they have ADD, he became excited about
this new understanding of himself, and about the effectiveness of the
treatment. “You know, I came in here not expecting much. But what
has happened is amazing. I’m a new man. My wife is overjoyed. The
world really should know about ADD.”
While I share Joshua’s enthusiasm, I should temper it. The initial
phase of treatment for ADD, the time of discovering that you have it,

treatment. “You know, I came in here not expecting much. But what
has happened is amazing. I’m a new man. My wife is overjoyed. The
world really should know about ADD.”
While I share Joshua’s enthusiasm, I should temper it. The initial
phase of treatment for ADD, the time of discovering that you have it,
of making use of the insight this brings, of finding out that the
medication really works, this phase of treatment is exciting. It can
indeed transform one’s life. New realms open up to the individual.
For some it is as dramatic as suddenly being able to speak a foreign
language they’d never been able to understand before, or swing the
tennis racquet that had always felt like a pickax in their hands before,
or get the books and papers and projects filed and organized that had
mounted like heaps of refuse in their minds before.
On the other hand, after the initial phase of treatment, the struggle
usually does not end. For some lucky people it does, but for most
people ADD continues to pose problems daily. While the treatment
helps with the symptoms, it does not eradicate them. The ADD does
not go away. It cannot be surgically removed. If one has it as an
adult, one has it for life.

People in treatment for ADD usually still struggle with issues of
organization, impulse control, and distractibility. But more difficult
than that, they struggle with the secondary symptoms that years of
living with undiagnosed ADD created. These are symptoms such as
impaired self-image, low self-esteem, depression, fearfulness of
others, mistrust of self, skittishness in relationships, and anger over
the past. These wounds heal very slowly.
* Paul Wender, Joseph Biederman, Rachel Gittleman-Klein,
Gabrielle Weiss, Russell Barkley, Kevin Murphy, Ronald Kessler,
Lenard Adler, Stephen Faraone, and Bennett and Sally Shaywitz, to
name a few, have now all written about ADD as it occurs in adults.

4

LIVING AND LOVING WITH ADD

ADD IN COUPLES
In couples where one or both partners have ADD, life can list and
yaw from day to day. As one member of a couple said to me, “I never
know what to expect. I can’t rely on him for anything. It’s really a
circus.” The syndrome can disrupt intimate relationships and leave
each partner exhausted. However, if the situation is subtly regulated,
both people can work together, instead of being at odds.
When ADD is at the root of a marriage in stress, the diagnosis is
often overlooked because the couple’s problems can look like those of
any couple. A husband comes home and immediately starts reading
the newspaper, has trouble paying attention especially when talking
about feelings, drinks too much, and struggles with self-esteem while
ignoring his wife’s repeated attempts to get close to him. Or a wife
daydreams chronically, feels depressed, complains of never having
reached her potential, and feels trapped at home. These symptoms,
in both instances, are consistent with ADD, but few people would
think of ADD because the complaints are so commonplace.
Often the symptoms can bring a couple to the brink of divorce.
Sam and Mary Rothman, for example, were referred to me by Sam’s
therapist, whom Sam had been seeing because Mary felt it was the
only alternative to separation. Now both in their early forties, they
had been married eight years, and they had one child, a boy, David,
age five.
They arrived fifteen minutes late for their first appointment. Sam
blamed the traffic. “The traffic wouldn’t have mattered if we had left
on time,” Mary quickly added.
“She’s right,” Sam said. “But that’s the way I am. I’m late
everywhere.”
“What kind of work do you do?” I asked.
“I’m an emergency-room physician,” he answered. “But I haven’t
practiced in a few years. I was a cartoonist for a while, and right now

I’m trying to make it as a freelance writer.”
“How’s it going?” I asked.
“It’s tough, but I’m getting work. So far, at least.”
“Sam, let’s tell him why we’re here,” Mary interjected.
“Do you want me to, or do you want to?” Sam asked, looking at
Mary. They had seated themselves at opposite ends of my couch.
Both looked younger than they were—Sam, tall, trim, with thick curly
black hair, and Mary, shorter, black hair parted down the middle,
tortoiseshell glasses, and a notebook in her hands.
“We’re here because …” Mary began, then paused, as if gathering
many thoughts. “We’re here because quite frankly this man is
making my life into a living hell. No, he doesn’t beat me or cheat on
me, or drink, or gamble. He just behaves like an irresponsible little
boy. I don’t mind that he changes jobs because he finds being a
doctor isn’t interesting enough. I don’t mind that he gets up in the
middle of the night because he’s bored and wants to go flying; I don’t
mind that he makes plane reservations for Australia for all of us
without asking me about it and then calls me a wet blanket for not
being overjoyed; I don’t mind that he travels more than he’s at home;
I don’t mind that our life insurance is so expensive it’s not worth
having because of his flying and gliding and skydiving; I don’t mind
that Sam is incapable of picking things up or remembering where
anything is or keeping track of anybody’s birthday or anniversary; I
don’t mind that he can’t watch one TV show for more than five
minutes without needing to see what else is on even if he’s liking the

having because of his flying and gliding and skydiving; I don’t mind
that Sam is incapable of picking things up or remembering where
anything is or keeping track of anybody’s birthday or anniversary; I
don’t mind that he can’t watch one TV show for more than five
minutes without needing to see what else is on even if he’s liking the
show he’s watching—I don’t mind any of that so much. But what I do
mind is that he doesn’t know that I exist. He is so wrapped up in
himself that I might as well be a robot. He has no conception of what
my inner life is. He doesn’t even know that I have an inner life. He
doesn’t know who I am. After eight years of marriage, the man I’m
married to doesn’t know me. And he doesn’t know that he doesn’t

know me. That’s what makes it hell. None of this bothers him. He’s
so oblivious. That is why we’re here, doctor. That is why we’re here.
At least that’s my side of it. Would you like to tell yours, honey?”
We both looked at Sam. Sam took a deep breath and let it out
slowly. “You always did have a way with words. What can I say? She’s
right. But I don’t do it on purpose. The stuff about your inner life
isn’t fair. I know you have an inner life. I think I know what’s on your
mind most of the time, in fact.”
“Oh, really?” Mary said. “Then tell me.”
“Well, I’m on your mind for one thing—” Sam began.
“There, you see,” Mary interrupted, “he’s so self-centered he thinks
he’s the only thing on my mind.”
“May I cut in here for a minute?” I asked. “There was a reason you
came to see me, as opposed to some other psychiatrist, am I right?”
“Yes,” Sam said. “At my wife’s insistence, I started psychotherapy a
few months ago.” Mary sighed at that remark and rolled her eyes, but
she let Sam talk on. “My shrink—you don’t mind if I call them, or
you, a shrink, do you?—anyway Harry, which is actually what I call
my shrink, I like him, you know I wasn’t sure I would, no offense but
psychiatry isn’t one of the fields of medicine I trust all that much,
anyway, Harry said he thought maybe I had ADD, and if we were to
get couples therapy, maybe it would make sense to kill two birds with
one stone, so to speak, and do it with someone who knows about
ADD. Make sense?”
“That’s another thing,” Mary put in. “After he rambles on, he says,
‘Make sense?’ You nod reflexively, but you’re thinking, No, that
didn’t make sense at all.”
“Actually, I did understand this time,” I said. “As I think Harry told
you, he called me before you came here to tell me his concerns.”

“OK, great,” Sam said. “Harry’s on the job.”
As we reviewed Sam’s history, the evidence mounted for a
diagnosis of ADD. “But,” Mary asked, “how do you tell ADD from
being selfish? I mean, I’m not a psychiatrist, but isn’t there such a
thing as pathological narcissism? That’s what I think Sam has. He’s
only aware of himself.”
“Maybe we could look at it a bit differently,” I suggested. “He
seems only to be aware of himself because he’s constantly being
distracted, or he’s being drawn to some form of intense stimulation
to avert boredom.”
“So he finds me boring,” Mary said.
“No, it’s not you. It’s everyday life. He hasn’t learned how to focus
in on everyday life and be there. Instead, he needs the emergency
room, speaking concretely as well as metaphorically, to get his
attention.”
“I don’t find you boring, Mary. Really, I do not,” Sam said
emphatically.
“But if I matter to you, why don’t you pay attention to me, why

“No, it’s not you. It’s everyday life. He hasn’t learned how to focus
in on everyday life and be there. Instead, he needs the emergency
room, speaking concretely as well as metaphorically, to get his
attention.”
“I don’t find you boring, Mary. Really, I do not,” Sam said
emphatically.
“But if I matter to you, why don’t you pay attention to me, why
don’t you remember things? Even if you don’t care about them, if you
cared about me, you’d remember, because you’d know how much
they matter to me.”
“But you see,” I interrupted, “it might be that he can’t remember,
at least not the way other people do.”
“He got through medical school,” Mary said.
“It was a struggle,” Sam quickly added. “You don’t know. All the
cram sessions. My friends would coach me before exams. It wasn’t
easy.”

“Plus there was the high intensity of the situation to motivate and
focus you,” I added.
“So our marriage is too low-intensity to keep his attention, is that
what you’re saying?” Mary responded.
“Not exactly, but I doubt you’d want your marriage to be under the
gun the way medical school is,” I said.
“That’s my whole problem,” Mary said. “It seems like the only way
I can get any of his attention at all is to put everything under the gun.
And I’m tired of living that way. I want him to take some of the
responsibility. I don’t care whether you call it ADD or selfishness, or
just being a jerk, I’m tired of it. I want him to get to know me. I want
him to worry with me about where David’s going to school instead of
just nodding. I don’t want to feel like I have to squeeze everything I
have to say into the five seconds of attention he gives me a day. I
don’t want to feel like I’m married to an immature person who’s still
trying to find himself. Can’t he just grow up?”
“If I told you that the kinds of things you are saying are precisely
the kinds of things that usually get said to people with adult ADD,
what would you think?” I asked.
“I’d say, ‘So what?’ I still want a life.”
Mary and Sam found a life, it is fair to say. It took some time,
because, in addition to making the diagnosis of ADD, other work had
to be done, much of which was facilitated by Harry in his individual
sessions with Sam, and some of which was done in our couples
therapy.
Once Sam’s ADD was diagnosed, he started on Ritalin at a dosage
of 10 mg three times a day, and it worked well in helping him focus
and reducing his mood swings. He experienced no side effects, and

the medication allowed him to sustain focus in a way he never had
been able to before. The medication took him out of the selfcentered, fast-paced, stimulation-seeking, always-distracted cloud
he’d come to live in and deposited him in the ordinary here and now.
It allowed him to get to know his own feelings, to get to know his
wife, and to be present wherever he actually was.
The struggle didn’t end with the diagnosis, however. Sam and
Mary had to work hard to make their marriage last. It took
persistence and a daily, habitual tending to each other. Sam had to
unlearn a number of habits, and Mary had to get past a backlog of
anger and resentment. They loved each other and wanted to be
together, and they worked to stay together. But it was by no means
easy.
ADD does not occur in a vacuum. The partner of an individual
with ADD can benefit from a receptive forum as much as the person
with ADD can. The stresses on the partner can mount as he or she

anger and resentment. They loved each other and wanted to be
together, and they worked to stay together. But it was by no means
easy.
ADD does not occur in a vacuum. The partner of an individual
with ADD can benefit from a receptive forum as much as the person
with ADD can. The stresses on the partner can mount as he or she
tries to hold things together, keep the family from sinking, either
financially or emotionally, and generally try to bring order out of the
chaos. In Mary’s case the single most useful tool was knowing about
ADD. Before she knew what ADD was and that Sam had it, she was
left with explanations like “selfish” or “narcissistic” to explain what
she didn’t like about Sam. Once she understood what ADD was, and
once she understood that it was a neurological condition, she was
much better able to forgive Sam his shortcomings and work on
finding solutions.
In addition to rethinking Sam’s behavior in terms of ADD, Mary
also needed Sam to pay attention to her life. Being the spouse of an
adult with ADD can be exasperating, as Mary could attest. The
spouse often feels enraged and unheard. The more angry the spouse
becomes, the more devaluing she becomes, and the more devaluing
she becomes, the more her partner withdraws.

We often see the following cycle in couples where one member has
ADD:
In order to interrupt the cycle, one needs not only to treat the ADD
but also to address the feelings of anger the non-ADD spouse
harbors. Those angry feelings may have built up quite a head of
pressure over the years and it may take more than a few weeks or
months for them to subside. If the non-ADD spouse has been
running the ship for years, feeling unsupported and overlooked all
the while, then that person is bound to feel angry. Simply saying
“Well, I have ADD” will not make the anger go away. In fact, it may
make it worse. The spouse may feel doubly angry finding out, after
all these years, that there was a reason for the disorganization and
distractibility, a medical condition that was going untreated. “You
mean all this suffering has been unnecessary?” one spouse
exclaimed. “Now I really want to kill him.”
The anger is entirely understandable. It must be acknowledged,
expressed, and, finally, put into perspective. It was important for

Mary to feel validated and heard. It was important that Sam
acknowledge how difficult he had been, whether it was his “fault” or
not. It was not that Mary needed to blame Sam, but rather that she
needed for Sam to know how much pain she had been in due to
Sam’s ADD. Just as Sam needed Mary to understand what ADD was
and how it affected his behavior, Mary also needed for Sam to
understand what living with a spouse with untreated ADD was like,
and how that had affected Mary’s behavior. It is essential in treating
a couple where one partner has ADD that the feelings of both
partners be heard and taken up with equal seriousness.
Sometimes one member of a couple will present himself as the
“identified patient” and request that the spouse be left out of the
treatment. A patient named Edgar brought his wife with him, but he
wanted to speak with me alone first, he said. Edgar came to see me
because he had been thrown out of the family system. His extended
family decided they had had enough of him. Since they owned the car
business Edgar worked for, they had the power to fire him. One day
they called him in and told him that because he was so irresponsible

wanted to speak with me alone first, he said. Edgar came to see me
because he had been thrown out of the family system. His extended
family decided they had had enough of him. Since they owned the car
business Edgar worked for, they had the power to fire him. One day
they called him in and told him that because he was so irresponsible
they could no longer employ him. They would see to it that he didn’t
starve, but he was no longer welcome in the business or at their
homes. They were fed up with him, tired of his shenanigans, and they
felt the only way to deal with him was to put him out. They thought
he was a born loser, and an annoying one at that.
“What can I tell you, Doc?” he said, looking at me through thick
glasses, chewing a piece of gum, his forehead wrinkled in worry. “I
am obnoxious. I’m extremely obnoxious. My family couldn’t stand
me anymore so they threw me out. I can see their point, to tell you
the truth. It’s probably just a matter of time before my wife does the
same.” Then the wrinkles in his forehead relaxed and he smiled. He
lowered his voice now, speaking sotto voce, so as not to be
overheard, even though there was no one else in my office. “But you
know what, Doc? I like being the way I am. It’s me. I’ve gotta be me,
and all that, you know? So I blow a few grand on a cruise to nowhere.
So why shouldn’t she be thrilled that I give her a trip? So I ride down

the highway with Dylan blasting, smoking a joint. So what? It’s how I
do my best thinking. I can’t sit in an office and look at the nice little
people in the showroom and make my plans for the day and be a
good little schmuck. It’s just not me. Is that so bad? Am I a worthless
piece of scum just because I haven’t been to the dentist in ten years?
That was on their list, can you believe that? What’s it to them if I go
to the dentist? Who likes to go to the dentist? So I get
excommunicated for that? I’m telling you, Doc, I may be obnoxious,
but I don’t deserve what’s happening to me.”
“Do you really mean that you’re obnoxious?” I asked.
“Yes, I am. But I can’t help it. I see something that I want to do,
and before I’ve had the chance to think about it, I’m doing it. I’ve
stopped making promises to Amanda, I’ve broken so many of them.
I’m impossible, just like she says. You know what I really like to do? I
like to go down to the showroom about three o’clock in the morning
when I can’t sleep and turn on the radios of all the cars on the
showroom floor and just let ’em blast. It’s a great feeling, standing in
there with the lights on and all the radios blaring when outside
everybody else is asleep. I can have the world to myself then, the way
I like it, on my terms.”
“But the family—” I started to say.
“Just about pukes,” Edgar answered. “They say, ‘How does that
look to the rest of the world, someone playing around in the
showroom in the middle of the night?’ They say, ‘Grow up, Edgar,’
and I say, ‘You’re right, I’ll try.’ But I can’t grow up. I guess that’s my
problem, Doc. I’m just permanently stuck in childhood.”
Although Edgar’s behavior was peculiar, the description of an
adult with ADD as immature or childish is not uncommon. People
don’t know how else to make sense of this kind of behavior, so they
attack it as being beneath adult standards. They hope to shame the

problem, Doc. I’m just permanently stuck in childhood.”
Although Edgar’s behavior was peculiar, the description of an
adult with ADD as immature or childish is not uncommon. People
don’t know how else to make sense of this kind of behavior, so they
attack it as being beneath adult standards. They hope to shame the

person into changing his ways. That tactic usually doesn’t work.
“Edgar,” I said, “why do you think you do these things?”
“I don’t know, Doc! Jeez, that’s why I’m here. You’re supposed to
tell me.”
“I’ll try to, but I need more information. What are some other
things you do that people object to?”
“Well, there’s the speeding I told you about, and the showroom.
Insulting the customers, that’s a biggie. I mean, what can I tell you? I
don’t like someone’s attitude, I don’t have much patience with them.
I told one the other day she should work at the Department of Motor
Vehicles, her personality would fit right in. I mean, she kept handing
me all these forms and not speaking to me, it was annoying, you
know what I mean? But they’re right, I shouldn’t speak like that to a
customer. The customer’s always right, and all that. Sometimes I just
can’t help myself.”
“It’s kind of fun, isn’t it?” I said.
“It sure is. They think so, too, underneath it all. They’re gonna
miss having me around. Who else have they got to tell those jokers
off?”
As is usually the case, Edgar’s problem was not just ADD, but ADD
was a big part of it. His impulsivity, restlessness, tactlessness, and
high energy all contributed to the fix he was in. Despite how
obnoxious he said he was, he was also quite likable, and I was sure
that he was right, his family would miss having him around.
“Do you ever get sad, Edgar?” I asked.
“Try not to,” he said. “Don’t slow down long enough. What’s the
point? Red roses for a blue lady and all that? You can have it. My
philosophy is live, live, live.” He took off his glasses, produced a
handkerchief from his back pocket, and wiped his forehead.

Later I met with Amanda and Edgar together. Amanda was a kindfaced woman a half a foot taller than Edgar who was as calm as
Edgar was excitable. “I can’t tell you why I love him, but I do. Isn’t
that a line in a song? Anyway, it’s true. But he does drive me crazy.
The thing about it is, he drives himself crazy, too. He’s not a bad
man, don’t let anybody tell you that. He’s like a pot that boils over,
that’s all. Is there any way to turn down the heat?” she asked.
“How do you manage life with him?” I asked.
“Oh, it’s a trip,” she said. “Never a dull moment. I’m just getting a
little tired, and I know he is fed up with these messes.”
After a few weeks of getting to know Edgar and getting some tests,
I was confident that he had ADD. His ADD had to be discriminated
from mania. In mania, the “high” is higher than in ADD. That is to
say, the person with mania is under greater pressure and is more out
of control than the person with ADD. The person with mania exhibits
certain symptoms that the person with ADD does not show,
symptoms such as pressured speech, where the words literally seem
to fly out of the individual’s mouth under great pressure, and flight of
ideas, where the individual flies from topic to topic without a
moment’s pause. Mania and ADD leave a qualitatively different
impression. The person with mania seems uncontrollable to the
outside observer, whereas the person with ADD simply appears

to fly out of the individual’s mouth under great pressure, and flight of
ideas, where the individual flies from topic to topic without a
moment’s pause. Mania and ADD leave a qualitatively different
impression. The person with mania seems uncontrollable to the
outside observer, whereas the person with ADD simply appears
hurried or distracted. On the basis of Edgar’s childhood history,
which was suggestive of ADD, and his current situation, which
showed periods of agitation but not mania, and on the basis of
psychological testing, the determination was made that Edgar had
ADD.
Rather than see Edgar individually, I decided to see him with
Amanda. It was as important for Amanda to understand what was
going on as for Edgar. His capacity for insight was minimal at first,
and his ability to observe himself was not reliable. Amanda became
his coach, so to speak, reminding him of what he otherwise would

forget. For most situations this kind of couples therapy would not
work, because it identifies one member of the couple as the patient.
But for ADD it is a realistic way to proceed.
With Amanda’s help, and with the help of medication, Edgar was
able, over time, to develop some capacity to reflect before acting, to
find relaxation and focus by other means than fast cars, loud music,
and marijuana, and to think before speaking. He even made an
appointment to see the dentist. He often asked me to increase the
dose of the medication, or to go at him harder in therapy. “I can take
it, Doc. Sock it to me.” I had to explain to him that more wasn’t
always better, and that some of his expectations for a “total
overhaul,” as he called it, were a bit beyond reach just now.
After six months Edgar and Amanda felt ready to move on. The
question of when to end therapy for ADD is an open one. For some
people the treatment lasts just a few sessions. For most people,
however, it takes longer than that. The individual—or couple—must
rethink a great deal of behavior, and a good therapist can facilitate
this process. Also, it can take a while to find the right dosage of the
right medication. Finally, the emotional adjustment to ADD can
require psychotherapy. The average duration of treatment for adult
ADD is about three to six months.
I met with Amanda and Edgar together for one last visit. Edgar’s
family had given him his job back, conditionally, and, as Amanda
told me, they had indeed missed him.
“Thanks a lot, Doc,” Edgar said, still chewing a piece of gum. “I
never thought I’d say that to a man in your line of work, if you know
what I mean.”
“Edgar!” Amanda said, slapping his knee.
“Do you know what you’re thanking me for?” I asked.

“Of course, Doc,” Edgar said. “Of course I know what I’m thanking
you for. I’m thanking you for doing a very respectable job of
shrinking my head.”
“Edgar!” Amanda said again.
“That’s quite all right,” I said. “In fact, that’s an excellent
compliment. But I was wondering if what we’ve been saying in here
makes sense to you now that we’re finishing.”
“I’ll tell you the truth, Doc. I can’t remember most of what you’ve
told me. Amanda here, the rod and staff of my life, has written all
kinds of things down and she reads them to me when we get home,
and she makes lists and does all the things you’ve said we should do,
and she sees to it that I do the things I’m supposed to do, including
take the medication. But do I know what we’ve been doing here? I

told me. Amanda here, the rod and staff of my life, has written all
kinds of things down and she reads them to me when we get home,
and she makes lists and does all the things you’ve said we should do,
and she sees to it that I do the things I’m supposed to do, including
take the medication. But do I know what we’ve been doing here? I
know I have ADD. That much I’ve learned. Don’t ask me what it
means, except whatever it is, I feel much different now. Not as edgy.
Not as out of control.”
“Do you miss the pot and speeding in the car?” I asked.
“The truth?” Edgar asked. “The truth is I don’t, if you can believe
that. Can you believe that? In fact, it scares me to think of it now. But
maybe that’s just because I’ve spent so much time lately with
Amanda and you. We’ll have to see what tomorrow brings.”
The last I heard, Edgar and Amanda were together, Edgar was
working, and life was pretty good.
There are many other issues that come up in working with couples
and ADD. One of the most important, and least written about, is
sexuality.

The impact of ADD upon sexuality is poorly understood. However,
we have seen many people in our practice, both men and women,
who complain of either an inability to pay attention during sex well
enough to enjoy it, or the opposite: a hyperfocused hypersexuality.
Those who appear to be hypersexual may turn to sex as a form of
intense stimulation to help them focus. Many adults with ADD are
drawn to high-stimulus situations as a means of alleviating boredom
or clearing their mind of distraction. Some get involved in physically
dangerous activities, such as racecar-driving or vertical skiing or
bungee-jumping or they get involved in risky activities like gambling
or dangerous romances. They do these things as a means of focusing
themselves; they focus around the high stimulation. For some adults
with ADD, sex acts as a kind of stimulating medication, and they use
it to find not only the pleasure of orgasm but the pleasure of being
focused.
On the other hand, those who cannot pay attention often accuse
themselves—or are accused by lovers—of being “frigid” or
“undersexed” or involved with someone else. In fact, they may enjoy
sex a great deal but simply have problems staying focused while
making love, just as they have problems staying focused during any
other activity.
One woman left me an anonymous note after a lecture I had given.
It was the first time anyone had put plainly to me how distractibility
can directly interfere with sexual activity:
Dear Dr. Hallowell,
I enjoyed your talk very much, and I wanted to ask you this
question, or, more accurately make this comment during the
discussion period, but frankly I was too embarrassed. So I am
leaving you this note in the hope that the concerns it raises can be
of help to other people.

can directly interfere with sexual activity:
Dear Dr. Hallowell,
I enjoyed your talk very much, and I wanted to ask you this
question, or, more accurately make this comment during the
discussion period, but frankly I was too embarrassed. So I am
leaving you this note in the hope that the concerns it raises can be
of help to other people.

I am a forty-two-year-old woman. I’m quite attractive, if I do
say so myself, and I love my husband. He is devoted to me. I am
the woman of his dreams, he says. However, until I was
diagnosed with ADD a year ago, I had never had an orgasm. In
fact, my husband and I never had a satisfactory sex life. He had
adored me from the start—I think that’s why he stayed with me.
But sex between us? It was boring at best.
For the longest while I thought the problem was that I was just
frigid. I was raised a Catholic, and I figured I just never got past
the impact the nuns had on me. But it tore me up inside. Because
I had sexual feelings. I had them all the time. I just couldn’t focus
them, in bed with my husband. I read lots of erotic literature, I
had incredible urges toward other people, none of which I acted
on—and I saw several different therapists to work on what I
thought was my mental block. How could I feel so sexy, look sexy,
dress sexy, be married to an incredible man, and yet think of
tomorrow’s shopping list as he’s making love to me? Once in a
while, I guess that’s normal, but all the time?
The worst part was I really started to hate myself for this and to
feel tremendously inadequate. I hate to say this, but I even
thought of just running away—you know, the slow boat to
nowhere. But I never would have left. The kids, my husband, I
couldn’t leave them, although, as miserable as I was at times, I
think they might have been happier without me.
Then I got lucky. A friend referred me to a new therapist, and
this woman knew about ADD. She made the diagnosis in two
sessions and started me on treatment. What a difference! I have
never read anywhere about how ADD affects sexuality, but in my
case the change was incredible! Now I could focus, now I could be
there. After a while I didn’t even need the medication. It was a
matter of realizing that it was ADD, and not some inadequacy or
hidden guilt on my part. Then it was a matter of taking steps to
have sex at the right time, of providing soothing music to take

over the daydreaming part of my mind, and of talking to my
husband openly about it. He was really great. It turns out he had
been blaming himself as much as I had been blaming myself.
It is amazing how subtle, but how crucial, this discovery has
been for me. I can’t help but think there are a lot of women out
there who are simply distractible, but who think they are sexually
inadequate or just bored instead.
Now I can have orgasms, but more than that, I approach sex
with enthusiasm instead of dread. I can be there, with my
husband, instead of somewhere else. I have learned how to enjoy
myself sexually. I would never have done this if I had not found
out about ADD. The treatment has helped me in all areas of my
life, but it has helped me sexually more than anything. My main
problem was in staying focused, and I never knew it. I kept
thinking it was something much worse, more complicated, and
unfixable. And when I consider how relatively simple—yet
powerful—the answer was, I wanted to share it with you in the

life, but it has helped me sexually more than anything. My main
problem was in staying focused, and I never knew it. I kept
thinking it was something much worse, more complicated, and
unfixable. And when I consider how relatively simple—yet
powerful—the answer was, I wanted to share it with you in the
hope you will share it with others.
Since I never had a chance to thank the anonymous author of that
note, let me say now, thank you, wherever you are. Your note caused
me to start paying attention to an aspect of ADD most of us have
largely overlooked. So far, I have gathered a great deal of anecdotal
evidence, full of inconsistency; but many people do indeed report
that ADD affects their sexuality, either in the direction of
nonresponsiveness or toward hypersexuality. Usually, treatment
helps both groups of people.
The woman in the letter provides a good example of a person who
had felt she was nonresponsive. As an example of a person whose
ADD led him toward hypersexuality, consider the case of Brian, a
thirty-nine-year-old unmarried man who considered himself a “sex
addict.” He constantly sought out flirtations or liaisons with women,

and he felt that he was incapable of resisting any sort of sexual
temptation. He was unable to maintain a long-term relationship
because of his unremitting infidelities. Unlike some men who fit this
profile, Brian was disturbed by his behavior. He wanted to settle
down into one relationship and have a family. He did not want to be
a “Don Juan,” as he put it, but he found that he could not resist the
power of his attraction to women.
He spent years in psychotherapy trying to get at the roots of his
problem. He and his therapist explored the issue from many
different angles. Was he acting out some unconscious hostility
toward women by seducing them and then leaving them? Was he
plagued by a basic fear of intimacy that lead him to seek a new
person the minute he got close to anyone? Was he trying to bolster
some sense of sexual inadequacy by proving to himself over and over
again that he could attract women? In therapy he took up all of these
possibilities, and others as well.
When he came to see me, he and his therapist had decided that he
was addicted to women. They wondered, based on an article the
therapist had read, if seeing the problem through the lens of ADD
might help.
Indeed it did. In reviewing Brian’s history from childhood to
adulthood, I found he had had problems with distractibility and
impulse control all along. Many people with ADD find that certain
forms of highly stimulating behavior help them focus, and they turn
to these behaviors as a kind of unwitting self-treatment or selfmedication of their ADD. Some people turn to gambling as a source
of high stimulation and the concomitant focusing it provides. Some
people turn to high-risk activities such as driving at high speeds or
skydiving. In Brian’s case, he was using the high stimulation of
romance to help him focus.

to these behaviors as a kind of unwitting self-treatment or selfmedication of their ADD. Some people turn to gambling as a source
of high stimulation and the concomitant focusing it provides. Some
people turn to high-risk activities such as driving at high speeds or
skydiving. In Brian’s case, he was using the high stimulation of
romance to help him focus.

The following guidelines or “tips” might be helpful in dealing with
other issues of concern to couples in which one partner has ADD.
These tips offer a starting point for discussion between the partners.
The best way to use them is to read them out loud, together. Pause
over each suggestion and discuss whether it might help you. As you
do this, you can begin to set up your own way of dealing with ADD in
your relationship. The keys to it all, as is the case with most problems
in couples, are improving communication and resolving the power
struggle.
1. Make sure you have an accurate diagnosis. There are many
conditions that look like ADD, from too much coffee to
anxiety states to dissociative disorders to hyperthyroidism.
Before embarking on a treatment for ADD, consult with your
physician to make sure what you have is really ADD and not
something else. Once you are sure of the diagnosis, learn as
much as you can about ADD. There is an increasing body of
literature on the topic. The more you and your mate know, the
better you will be able to help each other. The first step in the
treatment of ADD—whether it be your partner’s or someone
else’s—is education.
2. Keep a sense of humor! If you let it be, ADD can be really
funny at times. Don’t miss out on the chance to laugh when
the laugh is there. At that psychological branch point we all
know so well, when the split-second options are to get mad,
cry, or laugh, go for the laughter. Humor is a key to a happy
life with ADD.
3. Declare a truce. After you have the diagnosis and have done
some reading, take a deep breath and wave the white flag. You
both need some breathing space to begin to get your
relationship on a new footing. You may need to ventilate a lot
of stored-up bad feeling. Do that, so you won’t lug it with you
everywhere.

4. Set up a time for talking. You will need some time to talk to
each other about ADD—what it is, how it affects your
relationship, what each of you wants to do about it, what
feelings you have about it. Don’t do this on the run, i.e.,
during TV commercials, while drying dishes, in between
telephone calls, etc. Set up some time. Reserve it for
yourselves.
5. Spill the beans. Tell each other what is on your mind. The
effects of ADD show up in different ways for different couples.
Tell each other how it is showing up between you. Tell each
other just how you are being driven crazy, what you like, what
you want to change, what you want to preserve. Get it all out
on the table. Try to say it all before you both start reacting.
People with ADD have a tendency to bring premature closure
to discussions, to go for the bottom line. In this case, the
bottom line is the discussion itself.
6. Write down your complaints and your recommendations. It
is good to have in writing what you want to change and what
you want to preserve. Otherwise you’ll forget.
7. Make a treatment plan. Brainstorm with each other as to
how to reach your goals. You may want some professional
help with this phase, but it is a good idea to try starting it on

6. Write down your complaints and your recommendations. It
is good to have in writing what you want to change and what
you want to preserve. Otherwise you’ll forget.
7. Make a treatment plan. Brainstorm with each other as to
how to reach your goals. You may want some professional
help with this phase, but it is a good idea to try starting it on
your own.
8. Follow through on the plan. Remember, one of the
hallmarks of ADD is insufficient follow-through, so you’ll have
to work to stick with your plan.
9. Make lists. Over time, lists will become a habit.
10. Use bulletin boards. Messages in writing are less likely to
be forgotten. Of course, you have to get in the habit of looking
at the bulletin board!

11. Put notepads in strategic places like by your bed, in your
car, in the bathroom and kitchen.
12. Consider writing down what you want the other person to
do and give it to him or her in the form of a list every day. This
must be done in a spirit of assistance, not of dictatorship.
Keep a master appointment book for both of you. Make sure
each of you checks it every day.
13. Take stock of your sex lives in light of ADD. As mentioned
earlier, ADD can affect sexual interest and performance. It is
good to know the problems are due to ADD, and not
something else.
14. Avoid the pattern of mess maker and cleaner-upper. You
don’t want the non-ADD partner to “enable” the ADD partner
by cleaning up all the time, in the manner that the
nonalcoholic spouse may “enable” the alcoholic spouse by
covering up all the time. Rather, set up strategies to break this
pattern.
15. Avoid the pattern of pesterer and tuner-outer. You don’t
want the non-ADD partner to be forever nagging and
kvetching at the ADD partner to pay attention, get his or her
act together, come out from behind the newspaper, etc. People
with ADD frequently need a certain amount of “down time”
every day to recharge their batteries. It is better that this time
be negotiated and set aside in advance rather than struggled
over each time it comes up.
16. Avoid the pattern of victim and victimizer. You don’t want
the ADD partner to present himself or herself as a helpless
victim left at the merciless hands of the all-controlling nonADD mate. This dynamic can evolve easily if you aren’t
careful. The ADD person needs support and structure; the
non-ADD mate tries to provide these. Unless there is open

and clear communication about what is going on, the support
and structure can feel like control and nagging.
17. Avoid the pattern of master and slave. Akin to number 16.
However, in a funny way it can often be the non-ADD partner
who feels like the slave to her or his mate’s ADD. The nonADD partner can feel that the symptoms of ADD are ruining
the relationship, wrapping around it like tentacles, daily
disrupting what could be, and once was, an affectionate bond.
18. Avoid the pattern of a sadomasochistic struggle as a
routine way of interacting. Prior to diagnosis and
intervention, many couples dealing with ADD spend most of
their time attacking and counterattacking each other. One
hopes to get past that and into the realm of problem-solving.
What you have to beware of is the covert pleasure that can be
found in the struggle. ADD is exasperating; therefore, you can
enjoy punishing your mate by fighting with him or her. Try,
rather, to vent your anger at the disorder, not at the person.
Say “I hate ADD” instead of “I hate you,” or say “ADD drives

What you have to beware of is the covert pleasure that can be
found in the struggle. ADD is exasperating; therefore, you can
enjoy punishing your mate by fighting with him or her. Try,
rather, to vent your anger at the disorder, not at the person.
Say “I hate ADD” instead of “I hate you,” or say “ADD drives
me crazy,” instead of “You drive me crazy.”
19. In general, watch out for the dynamics of control,
dominance, and submission that lurk in the background of
most relationships, let alone relationships where ADD is
involved. Try to get as clear on this as possible, so that you can
work toward cooperation rather than competitive struggle.
20. Break the tapes of negativity. Many people who have ADD
have long ago taken on a resigned attitude of “There’s no hope
for me.” The same can happen to both partners in the couple.
As will be mentioned in many places throughout this book,
negative thinking is a most corrosive force in the treatment of
ADD. What I call the “tapes of negativity” can play
relentlessly, unforgivingly, endlessly in the mind of the person
with ADD. It is as if they click on as the sun rises and click off

only when the unconsciousness of sleep shuts them down.
They play, over and over, grinding noises of “You can’t”;
“You’re bad”; “You’re dumb”; “It won’t work out”; “Look how
far behind you are”; “You’re just a born loser.” The tapes can
be playing in the midst of a business deal, in the reverie of a
car ride home, or they can take the place of making love. It is
hard to be romantic when you are full of negative thoughts.
The thoughts seduce you, like a satanic mistress, into “loving”
them instead. These tapes are very difficult to break, but with
conscious and sustained effort, they can be erased.
21. Use praise freely. Encouragement, too. Begin to play
positive tapes. Find something positive to say about your mate
or about yourself every day. Build each other up consciously,
deliberately. Even if it feels hokey at first, over time it will feel
good and have a sustaining effect.
22. Learn about mood management. Anticipation is a great
way to help anyone deal with the highs and lows that come
along. This is especially true in ADD. If you know in advance
that when you say “Good morning, honey!” the response you
get might be “Get off my back, will you!” then it is easier to
deal with that response without getting a divorce. And if the
other member of the couple has learned something about his
or her moods, the response to “Good morning, honey!” might
be “I’m in one of my ADD funks,” or something like that,
instead of an attack on the other person.
23. Let the one who is the better organizer take on the job of
organization. There’s no point in flogging yourself with a job
you can’t do. If you can’t do the checkbook, don’t do the
checkbook. If you can’t do the kids’ clothes shopping, then
don’t do the kids’ clothes shopping. That’s one of the
advantages of being in a couple. You have another person to
help out. However, the job the other person does instead of

organization. There’s no point in flogging yourself with a job
you can’t do. If you can’t do the checkbook, don’t do the
checkbook. If you can’t do the kids’ clothes shopping, then
don’t do the kids’ clothes shopping. That’s one of the
advantages of being in a couple. You have another person to
help out. However, the job the other person does instead of

you must then be adequately appreciated, noticed, and
reciprocated.
24. Make time for each other. If the only way you can do this
is by scheduling it, then schedule it. This is imperative. Many
people with ADD slip away like quicksilver; now you have
them, now you don’t. Clear communication, the expression of
affection, the taking up of problems, playing together and
having fun—all these ingredients of a good relationship
cannot occur unless you spend time together.
25. Don’t use ADD as an excuse. Each member of the couple
has to take responsibility for his or her actions. On the other
hand, while one mustn’t use ADD as an excuse, knowledge of
the syndrome can add immeasurably to the understanding
one brings to the relationship.
In 2010, my wife, Sue, who is a couples therapist, and I published
a book on marriage called Married to Distraction. It was not
exclusively about ADD, but about how our age of interruptions and
distractions has impacted all intimate relationships. The book also
has the virtue of including the viewpoint both of a woman (my wife)
and a woman married to a man who has ADD (me).

5

THE BIG STRUGGLE

ADD AND THE FAMILY
Consider the following scene, which is representative of many
families in which one person has ADD:
“Mom, I told you I would have my homework done by Sunday
night, and I will have it done by Sunday night. Now will you please
just get off my back?” Tommy Eldredge kicks the trash basket next to
his mother’s desk as he storms out of the living room and into the
kitchen.
His mother rises from her chair in pursuit. “No, I won’t just get off
your back. Why should I? What have you done to deserve my trust?
It’s spring term of your tenth-grade year, you’re in the middle of high
school, and you’re flunking two courses. All you do is make promises
and you never come through. I’m fed up with it. If you want to ruin
your life—”
“Mom, calm down already. I’m not ruining my life. I’ve just had
some bad grades, that’s all.”
“Some bad grades? Some? You’ve had nothing but bad grades. And
it’s not the grades I’m concerned about. It’s the effort that goes into
them. Or lack of effort, I should say. You just don’t care. As long as
you can get out of the house, you don’t care what happens tomorrow.
Which is why you are not leaving the house this weekend. Not even
for a second. Not even for a half a second,” she says, and snaps her
fingers next to the back of his head.
Tommy turns on his mother. “You’re just a bitch, you know that?
You’re just a fucking bitch.”
At that point Tommy’s mother loses her temper completely, slaps
him across his face, and falls forward trying to follow the slap with a
punch at his arm. When she hits the floor, she starts crying. Tommy
tries to help her up, but she pushes him away as Tommy’s dad walks
into the kitchen. “Get out of the house,” he barks at Tommy and
rushes over to help his sobbing wife.

“I didn’t mean to hurt her,” Tommy says.
“Just get out,” his dad says. “Don’t come back.”
“Fine,” Tommy says, and leaves through the kitchen door, letting
the screen slam shut behind him.
The next day, Saturday, the family has reconvened. The other kids
go elsewhere while Mom and Dad sit down to talk with Tommy, who
was brought home by the police after being picked up in the bus
station at 3 A.M.
They all stare at each other, years of recriminations focused in this
one moment. “We need to make a plan,” Dad begins.
“First I want an apology,” Mom interrupts.
“I’m sorry,” Tommy says. “I didn’t mean for you to fall down. I
didn’t mean to call you what I called you.”
“Then why did you say it?” she asks.
“I don’t know. I was mad. It just came out.”
“But that’s the whole problem, Tommy,” his mother goes on. “You
don’t mean to do the things you do do, and you don’t do the things
you say you mean to do.”
Let me stop the scene here. What Mrs. Eldredge has just said gives
a pretty good short description of ADD: You don’t mean to do the
things you do do, and you don’t do the things you mean to do. If she
could stop herself at this point in the conversation, and say to
Tommy, “Aha! I can tell by what I just said that what you have is not
a case of incurable obstinacy but attention deficit disorder instead!”
then the outcome might be favorable. But what usually happens is

things you do do, and you don’t do the things you mean to do. If she
could stop herself at this point in the conversation, and say to
Tommy, “Aha! I can tell by what I just said that what you have is not
a case of incurable obstinacy but attention deficit disorder instead!”
then the outcome might be favorable. But what usually happens is

that these arguments build and ramify into conflagrations, burning
down many a family in the process.
What often develops in families where one child has ADD (or one
adult for that matter) is what we call the Big Struggle. The child with
ADD chronically fails to meet obligations, do chores, stay up with
schoolwork, keep to family schedules—get out of bed on time, arrive
home on time, show up for meals on time, be ready to leave the
house on time—keep his or her room tidied up, participate in family
life cooperatively, and in general “get with the program” at home.
This leads to chronic limit-setting by parents, with increasingly
stringent penalties and increasingly tight limitations on the child.
This, in turn, makes the child more defiant, less cooperative, and
more alienated, which leads parents to feel more exasperated with
what increasingly appears to be an attitude problem, under voluntary
control, rather than the neurological problem of ADD.
As parents become more and more fed up with the child’s
behavior, they become less and less sympathetic to whatever excuses
or explanations the child may offer, less and less willing to believe in
promises to do better, and more and more apt to apply stricter and
stricter consequences in a usually futile effort to control the child’s
behavior. Gradually, the child’s role in the family solidifies around
being the “problem child,” and he or she becomes the designated
scapegoat for all the family’s conflicts and problems. An old saying
about scapegoating is that the process requires a mob and a
volunteer. In the case of the Big Struggle the family forms the mob,
and the ADD behavior volunteers the child. Virtually anything that
goes wrong in the family gets blamed on the ADD child. Over time
the child is draped with a kind of blanket of derision and scorn that
smothers his development of confidence and self-esteem.
The Big Struggle may last for years. It may resemble a war, with
seasonal campaigns along various fronts—the homework front or the
attitude front or the chores front or the cooperation-andresponsibility front, or all of these at once—attacks and

counterattacks, the use of spies and special weapons, temporary
negotiated settlements, momentary surrenders, occasional
desertions, betrayals, treaties, and victories and defeats for both
sides at various times. Unfortunately, as in most civil wars, the whole
nation, or in this case the whole family, suffers.
The Big Struggle usually develops innocently enough, as one side
tries to persuade the other side to do something. The first bad report
card comes home, say in the fifth grade, and parents try to set up a
better study program. Or Dad tries to persuade his son to get out of
bed on time so he can drive him to school without being late for work
himself. Or Mom gets upset at her daughter’s refusal to read books.
Whatever the issue, once the struggle begins, it is hard to prevent it
from becoming the Big Struggle.
In the Big Struggle, parents feel they are doing their duty, that they
are doing all they can to straighten their child out, that if they didn’t

himself. Or Mom gets upset at her daughter’s refusal to read books.
Whatever the issue, once the struggle begins, it is hard to prevent it
from becoming the Big Struggle.
In the Big Struggle, parents feel they are doing their duty, that they
are doing all they can to straighten their child out, that if they didn’t
join in the Big Struggle the child would simply goof off interminably.
And the child feels he is fighting for his independence, that he is
resisting becoming an automaton. Or worse, the child doesn’t really
know what is going on. He is simply reacting. Punch, counterpunch,
you attack, I counterattack. The reason for the war is long forgotten
as the battles go on and on, taking on a life of their own. After a while
neither side quite remembers what is being fought for as
resentments build, grudges encrust, and the family slugs it out one
season into the next.
The problem is that the Big Struggle rarely achieves any
constructive end. There may be short-term gains, such as getting
homework done, but usually at so high a cost that it hardly seems
worth it. Until a diagnosis of ADD is made and all parties can
understand what is really going on, there will be little real progress.
Unfortunately, the hallmark symptoms of ADD—distractibility,
impulsivity, and high activity—are so commonly associated with
childhood in general that the possibility of an underlying

neurological cause is often not considered. A child like Tommy is
dealt with as just a rebellious adolescent, and each side ups the ante
as the misunderstanding gathers force and the Big Struggle rounds
into full swing.
“So what should I do?” Tommy asks. “Commit suicide?”
“You should try to get your act together,” his mother answers. “You
should take advantage of all the help we’ve tried to give you. You
should show up for your tutor. You should make the effort to bring
home your assignment book so we can help you check it over. You
should consider telling the truth when we ask you if you have any
tests on Friday. You should take that chip off your shoulder and get
over thinking the whole world is against you or just doesn’t
understand you. You should show us a little respect. You should—”
“Wait a minute,” Dad interrupts. “Tommy, you’re not even
listening to your mother, are you?”
Tommy has been staring at his red and purple Nikes. “I’m
listening, Dad. I could recite it all back if you want. I’ve heard it all
before.”
“Then why don’t you do something about it?” Dad asks through
clenched teeth.
Tommy looks at his father as if he’s about to tell him to piss off,
then stops himself and utters the words that form the last line of
defense for so many children and adolescents with ADD: “I don’t
know.”
“What do you mean, you don’t know?” his father bellows. “I can
accept anything but that. That’s just your way of tuning us out. You
don’t know. Well, why don’t you know? Can’t you think about it and
come up with some explanation as to why you’re such a screw-up?
Are you just stupid? I don’t think you’re stupid, although I’m
beginning to wonder. You just won’t wise up, will you?”

accept anything but that. That’s just your way of tuning us out. You
don’t know. Well, why don’t you know? Can’t you think about it and
come up with some explanation as to why you’re such a screw-up?
Are you just stupid? I don’t think you’re stupid, although I’m
beginning to wonder. You just won’t wise up, will you?”

Tommy’s mother pushes her fingers through her hair. “I wish I
could give up on you,” she says. “I wish I could just let you fall and
not give it a second thought.”
“So do I,” Tommy says glumly.
Mom and Dad look at each other and Tommy gnaws on his
fingernails as the Big Struggle reaches another impasse. This family
has been here many times before. Tommy is now sixteen and in the
tenth grade. His school career started out well, with his teachers
assessing him as a very smart and creative child, but the last several
years have been downhill. Now Tommy is just barely getting by
academically. His parents feel that they are taking school more
seriously than Tommy is. There are so many fights in the household
about Tommy that his younger brother has begun to resent him, and
his older sister, a high-school senior, is trying to play peacemaker
between Tommy and his parents.
The past few years read like chronicles from the war room:
March: Tommy promises to get extra help from French teacher on
a regular basis. Parents believe him when he says he’s doing this.
June: French teacher sends note home wondering why Tommy
never came in for extra help, given that he was going to fail the
course. Tommy and his father get so angry at each other that Tommy
runs away from home.
October: At a parent conference the school questions Tommy’s
parents as to whether everything is OK at home. Tommy seems so
erratic the school wonders if he is using drugs or if he is upset about
something they don’t know about. Tommy’s parents reassure the
school their marriage is fine and things at home are OK. They go
home and have a big fight over what is wrong with Tommy.

January: Tommy, who has told his parents all fall that he was
working on his science project on his own at school, admits, a week
before it is due, that he has done nothing on the project. Dad says he
can put up with anything but not lying. He says Tommy can damn
well face the consequences. Mom says the consequences will be
flunking science and it’s not worth it. Dad says, what should I do, do
it for him? Mom says, yes, and give him some punishment. In a
week’s time Tommy and Dad put together a prizewinning project,
based on an idea about a computer program Tommy had but never
got around to working up. They actually have a lot of fun doing the
project. Dad forgets about the punishment, and the whole family
glows for a while over winning the prize.
March: The day the family is to leave on vacation, Tommy
announces he doesn’t want to go. When pressed, he says he feels
cramped when he’s with the family. Dad explodes and gives Tommy
a lecture about how much he has to be grateful for. Tommy listens
passively and goes on the vacation. While away Tommy is
apprehended by a hotel security man for jumping from a secondfloor balcony into the pool. Tommy’s explanation is that he was
bored. Mom and Dad ground him for twenty-four hours and have an
argument with each other.
June: Tommy promises to mow the lawn before going out to the
movies with his friends on Friday. He forgets to do it. The next day
he promises he’ll do it after the football game. Once again he forgets.

apprehended by a hotel security man for jumping from a secondfloor balcony into the pool. Tommy’s explanation is that he was
bored. Mom and Dad ground him for twenty-four hours and have an
argument with each other.
June: Tommy promises to mow the lawn before going out to the
movies with his friends on Friday. He forgets to do it. The next day
he promises he’ll do it after the football game. Once again he forgets.
On Sunday his father tells him he cannot leave the house until the
lawn is mowed. Tommy takes this as a challenge and sneaks off on
his own, getting his sister to cover for him by saying he is upstairs
studying. However, his father catches him as he is coming home.
Enraged, he starts screaming at Tommy and then slams him against
the kitchen counter. A saucepan falls from a rack, clanking on the
brushed-stone floor. His father makes a fist and pulls back his arm as
if to punch, but then catches himself. He bites his knuckle and kicks
a cupboard door. He draws a deep breath and lets it out slowly as

Tommy looks on in fear. A moment passes before his father says, “I
can’t tell you how disappointed I am in you, son.”
Tommy winces, thinking it must be serious this time since he’s
never heard his father call him “son” before. “I just wanted to go over
to Peter’s house before I did the lawn. I knew you wouldn’t let me.”
His father turns and walks away. “Dad, I’m sorry. I’ll do the lawn
now. Really, I’m sorry.” His father just keeps on walking.
Finally, the Eldredges decide to seek professional help. They visit
with Tommy’s tutor, who suggests they get a diagnostic evaluation
from a child psychiatrist. “I think more may be going on here than
meets the eye,” he tells Tommy’s parents.
Tommy meets with a psychiatrist who interviews him alone, then
his parents alone, then the three of them together. After that, Tommy
is referred to a psychologist for some testing, then back to the
psychiatrist for the full report.
The evaluation yields the diagnosis of ADD. As the psychiatrist
explains what this means, Tommy’s mother looks on intently.
“Attention deficit disorder, or ADD, is a common condition,” the
psychiatrist begins, “and one that we have good treatments for.
However, until it is diagnosed and seen for what it is, it can lead to
very big misunderstandings. I think that has been happening in this
family. A lot of Tommy’s behavior can be explained in terms of ADD.
The main symptoms of the condition are easy distractibility,
impulsivity, and restlessness, all of which Tommy has.”
As the psychiatrist goes on with his explanation, Tommy’s mother
breaks down in tears. “You mean it’s not his fault? I’ve been after
him all these years for something he can’t help? I feel so guilty. This
is terrible.”

Often in families when ADD is diagnosed relatively late, in high
school, say, rather than in elementary school, parents feel guilty and
angry. They feel guilty that they didn’t pick it up sooner, and angry
that no one else told them about it. Keeping matters in perspective, it
is quite understandable for the diagnosis to be missed, as knowledge
about ADD is still spotty in schools and among many professionals.
Once the diagnosis is made, many parents need help in getting past
their own troubled feelings, just as the child needs help with his or
her feelings. The diagnosis can require a whole rethinking of the
family roles.
“So you’re not the family bozo anymore,” Tommy’s fourteen-yearold brother pipes up at a family-therapy session designed to educate

Once the diagnosis is made, many parents need help in getting past
their own troubled feelings, just as the child needs help with his or
her feelings. The diagnosis can require a whole rethinking of the
family roles.
“So you’re not the family bozo anymore,” Tommy’s fourteen-yearold brother pipes up at a family-therapy session designed to educate
the entire family about Tommy’s ADD.
“Alex, don’t talk that way,” Mom says.
“Well, it’s true,” Alex says. “He’s been a bozo, but now we’re
supposed to say he’s got a disease. It just sounds like a big excuse to
me.”
Alex’s reaction is typical of siblings when ADD has been diagnosed.
Siblings feel resentment at the amount of attention the person with
ADD is getting, and they feel anger, believing that their own hard
work will go unappreciated.
“You know, I work hard to get my stuff done,” Alex goes on. “What
if I just said, ‘Ooops, can’t do it this week, I have ADD.’ Could I get
special treatment then?”
“But you don’t have ADD,” Dad says.
“How do you know? I’ll bet I could have it if I let myself. And I’ll
bet Tommy wouldn’t have it if he tried not to.”
“What do you mean?” Mom asks.

“Well,” Alex says, “according to the doctor, with ADD you have
trouble paying attention and staying focused. Who doesn’t have that?
I can promise you whenever I’m in Mr. Hayworth’s classroom I have
lots of trouble paying attention and staying focused. And I don’t see
how if Tommy lies about having his homework done it’s anything but
a lie. Does ADD make you lie? It’s a license to kill, this ADD thing.
He’ll be able to get away with anything now.”
“That’s not quite true,” the psychiatrist interrupts. “He’ll still have
to be held accountable, it’s just that now we’ll have a better idea of
what he’s up against. It’s as if he’s been nearsighted all these years
and now we’re giving him glasses.”
“I don’t know,” Alex says, looking over at Tommy as if he had just
robbed a bank, “it still all sounds like baloney to me.”
Tommy leans back and gives his brother the finger. “You’re such a
wimp,” he says.
“You see?” Alex says.
“Wait a minute,” Dad interrupts. “Let’s not start arguing again.
We’ve done enough of that to last us a long while.”
“So what do we do?” Tommy’s sister asks. “This family wouldn’t
know what to talk about if we couldn’t talk about Tommy.”
“That’s not true, Suzie,” Mom says.
“Well, maybe it isn’t, but there sure will be some empty air time to
fill if we’re not going to have fights about Tommy anymore.”
“Who says we’re not going to have fights about Tommy?” Alex
asks. “I didn’t say I’d go along with that.”
“Nobody has said they’d go along with that,” the psychiatrist
interrupts. “And Suzie makes a good point. Your fights about Tommy

may have been serving a purpose and may be hard to replace.”
“What kind of purpose?” Dad asks.
“Well, for one thing they may be fun,” the psychiatrist says.
“Fun? What do you mean, fun?” Mom gasps. “They’re horrible.”
“I’m not sure,” the psychiatrist says, “but I think as horrible as they
may be, they may also be a form of family entertainment.”
“I think that’s true,” Suzie says, looking at Alex. “I can think of at
least one person who likes them a lot.”
“So what if I do,” Alex responds. “He’s got it coming to him.”
“There may be other reasons to keep the fights going as well,” the
psychiatrist goes on. “As long as Tommy takes the heat, it takes it off
other people.”
“You make it sound as if Tommy is just an innocent victim,” Dad

least one person who likes them a lot.”
“So what if I do,” Alex responds. “He’s got it coming to him.”
“There may be other reasons to keep the fights going as well,” the
psychiatrist goes on. “As long as Tommy takes the heat, it takes it off
other people.”
“You make it sound as if Tommy is just an innocent victim,” Dad
says.
“I don’t mean to,” the psychiatrist says. “I’m just suggesting you all
might want to keep things the way they are rather than see things
change.”
Families, by and large, like most groups, resist change. If one
member of a family wants to move away, this is often regarded as a
betrayal, for example. If one member of a family is fat and tries to
lose weight, often other members of the family will sabotage the
effort. If one member of a family wants to get out of a role he or she
has been playing for years, this is usually difficult to do because the
rest of the family tries not to let it happen. If your role is clown, you
remain the clown. If your role is responsible oldest child, you
probably keep that role, within your family, for your entire life. If you

are the black sheep, you’ll find it very difficult to change colors in the
eyes of your family no matter how many good deeds you do.
So it is with ADD. When the diagnosis is made and the family is
faced with the challenge to change, this challenge is often met with
great resistance. In the scene above, Tommy’s brother Alex voices the
resistance, but he is speaking not only for himself, but for the family
system as well. If you think of a family as an interconnected group, a
system rather than a set of discrete individuals, it is easier to see how
movement by one member sets off movement by another, as in a
reverberating circuit. And in the family system one member can
speak an opinion that everyone in the family holds to some extent
but doesn’t have to voice as long as that one member stays in his role.
In the example above, by expressing his skepticism and resentment
at the diagnosis of ADD, Alex allows the other members of the family
to be more understanding toward Tommy. Let’s see what happens
when Alex wavers.
“You mean I might not want Tommy to get this diagnosis because
it will make me take more heat?” Alex asks.
“Something like that,” the psychiatrist says.
Alex grunts. “I think you may have a point there.”
“Alex, are you feeling OK?” Mom asks with a forced smile.
“Yes, Mom, I am. Can’t I have my own opinion without you
questioning it?”
“I think Alex is trying to beat us to the punch,” Dad says. “He
wants to agree before we force him into it.”
“Alex is trying to be noble,” Suzie says sarcastically.
“Alex is full of it,” Tommy says, folding his arms. “Don’t trust him
for a second.”

By even tiptoeing out of his role, by even considering changing his
assigned lines, Alex receives rapid-fire attack from every member of
his family. He has a job to do, a role to play. If he doesn’t do it, even
if he just wavers, the family gets uneasy and attacks.
This kind of invisible process, common in families yet hard to pin
down, can get in the way of the changes the family needs to make
once ADD has been diagnosed.
“Wait a minute,” the psychiatrist intervenes. “Give Alex a chance.
Maybe he is opening the door to the possibility of change.” With
some help from the psychiatrist Alex is allowed to leave his role as
antagonist and skeptic for a while and look at the possibility that

down, can get in the way of the changes the family needs to make
once ADD has been diagnosed.
“Wait a minute,” the psychiatrist intervenes. “Give Alex a chance.
Maybe he is opening the door to the possibility of change.” With
some help from the psychiatrist Alex is allowed to leave his role as
antagonist and skeptic for a while and look at the possibility that
Tommy does have a bona fide medical condition that warrants a
rethinking of family roles and family procedures. Although in this
case Alex is the point person, it is a family decision. Once this
happens, once the family gives its permission for change to occur, or
at least to be explored, then the Big Struggle can begin to de-escalate,
and a negotiated peace can be worked out.
Once the fist of the Big Struggle has unclenched, then the family
can begin the commonsense process of negotiation. The two keys to
reaching this point are first, making the diagnosis of ADD, and
second, persuading the family unconscious to grant permission for
there to be change within the family system. How do you talk to the
family unconscious? How do you get it to grant permission to
change? The methods a therapist typically uses include
interpretation, which the psychiatrist did in the example above when
he suggested there might be reasons the family did not want to stop
fighting with Tommy, or confrontation, as when the psychiatrist said
to the family, “Wait a minute. Give Alex a chance.” In this instance,
the psychiatrist was confronting the family before the members
could stop Alex from stepping out of his role. Other techniques the
therapist may use include direction, support, and suggestion. These
may or may not take place within family therapy. Usually, some kind
of family meeting or family-therapy session helps to get change

going. A family need not feel it must go into family therapy to
negotiate change, but it would help if the family was aware of some
of the pitfalls in family negotiation. Whatever the course of action,
you should be aware that there is such a thing as a family
unconscious, and that it may try to sabotage the most constructive
and well-meaning efforts toward change.
As the family is trying to change, the watchword should be
“negotiation.” Although it may be quite difficult at first, the family
should try to bear the tension of reaching consensus, of listening to
and putting up with each other long enough for everybody to feel
heard and for everybody to have taken part in reaching the final
solution. It is easier to hold people to a negotiated settlement than a
dictated one.
For example, at a later session with just Tommy and his parents,
Tommy’s mom began, “We really have to come up with a plan about
homework.”
Tommy slumped down in his chair. The psychiatrist noticed this—
it was hard to miss—and simply said, “Let’s try to have this
discussion in a new way.”
Tommy and his parents looked at the psychiatrist for a moment,
then at each other. There was a pause, as anxiety mounted. “OK,”
Tommy’s dad said. “I’ll take the lead on this. I think I can see how my
way has not been the smartest way. What can I tell you? It was how I
was brought up. My father was just as dumb and stubborn as I am. If
I didn’t do what he told me to do, he took off his belt and hit me with
it until I did what he told me to do.”
“Did that method work?” the psychiatrist asked.
“Oh, sure,” Dad said. “In the short run. I did what he told me to do.

way has not been the smartest way. What can I tell you? It was how I
was brought up. My father was just as dumb and stubborn as I am. If
I didn’t do what he told me to do, he took off his belt and hit me with
it until I did what he told me to do.”
“Did that method work?” the psychiatrist asked.
“Oh, sure,” Dad said. “In the short run. I did what he told me to do.
But I learned to hate the son of a bitch. I’ve forgiven him now, I
guess, because he was just doing what he knew, probably just what
had been done to him. But it cost us a relationship. I still can’t talk to

him. I just can’t imagine talking to him about anything that matters.
So we have really stilted conversations that both of us can’t wait to
end. Then we go off and wish we had a better relationship with each
other.”
Tommy was looking at his father, obviously interested. “You never
told me about that, Dad,” Tommy said.
“No, I guess I didn’t,” his father said. “But I don’t want to make the
same mistake with you. And I won’t, damn it. Don’t get me wrong,
kiddo, I have never hit you with a belt and I do not intend to let you
manipulate me into doing whatever you want, but coming here has
made me think about some things, and I really don’t want to end up
not talking to you. I don’t know why, but I like the look of your ugly
puss and the sound of your squeaky voice.”
“Hey, Dad, I just love your forty-inch waist,” Tommy said.
Tommy’s mother sat watching and listening. At one point, when
neither her son nor her husband could see her, she nodded
approvingly at the psychiatrist.
“Thirty-eight,” Dad said.
“OK, I’ll give you two inches. So you also want homework?”
Tommy said.
“Yes. I would say you should want homework, but I know you
don’t. So what do you want?”
“Free time, money, girls, music, and fast cars,” Tommy said with a
big grin.
With these positions as starting points, Tommy and his dad, with
Mom’s silent encouragement, started to negotiate a plan they could
each live with. The key to doing it was to establish a tone of support
and cooperation first, and not come at the negotiation struggling.

Unfortunately, what often happens in families is that the ADD so
threatens the parents’ sense of control that one parent or the other—
or both—overreacts to the threat by trying to control every last detail.
This person insists on dictating how everything should be done, as
well as when, where, and why. As appealing as enlightened
monarchies may be in the abstract, in families torn by ADD they
rarely work well. This is for several reasons. First, monarchs are
usually not as enlightened as they think they are. Second, members
of the family understandably resent constantly being told what to do.
And third, such a controlling hand serves to raise, rather than
reduce, tension and conflict within the family. For example, in the
session above, had Tommy’s dad led off by saying something vaguely
combative or confrontational like, “Now see here, Tommy, you have
got to know that we are in charge, and you have got to live by our
rules,” it is unlikely the session would have gone well. The sides
would have polarized. Tension would have risen, and, even if Tommy
did partially agree with what his father was saying, he never could
have acknowledged that out of fear of losing face.
Negotiation, of course, is at times impossible. And with younger
children it is often not desirable. Younger children with ADD

would have polarized. Tension would have risen, and, even if Tommy
did partially agree with what his father was saying, he never could
have acknowledged that out of fear of losing face.
Negotiation, of course, is at times impossible. And with younger
children it is often not desirable. Younger children with ADD
especially need structure and limits. They want them, and they will
test parents until they get them. With a younger child it makes more
sense to say, “We’re going to McDonald’s,” than to say, “Which of the
five fast-food restaurants in this area would you like to go to
tonight?” A younger child gets caught up in the stimulation of
making such a vast decision. He or she gets preoccupied with all the
options and excited by all the possibilities, and could take an hour or
two to decide where to have dinner. It is best in these moments to
use one’s common sense and intervene decisively. “We are going to
McDonald’s,” may be met with protests, but it is also met with an
inner, unspoken sense of relief.
The art of negotiation, a key to the family management of ADD,
should be introduced at an early age, but not relied upon with
younger kids. Sometimes they are just unable to bear the tension it

requires. At other times they will turn negotiation into argument and
find it to be a lot of fun. Argument is stimulating, and people with
ADD love stimulation. A child with ADD who is bored may instigate
a family fight, just because he enjoys the stimulation of it. When this
happens it is fair to exercise parental control and say, “We’ll do it my
way because I said so,” and engage in no further discussion until the
situation has calmed down.
As children grow older, negotiation becomes more important in all
families. Negotiation is key to managing any family’s or any group’s
behavior. But getting on the track to negotiation in a family with
ADD is very difficult. Don’t get discouraged if you keep falling back
into a struggle as you try to negotiate. First, bear in mind that it is in
the nature of the person with ADD at any age to prefer a struggle to a
negotiation because a struggle is often more stimulating. It can be
more exciting to have a family fight than to act reasonably and
cooperatively and peacefully. It may be more fun to throw mashed
potatoes at your sister than to pass the bowl politely. Most people
with ADD love excitement and stimulation. So the Big Struggle is
usually more inviting—more engrossing—than some boring
negotiation.
Second, the process of negotiation is inherently difficult for
someone with ADD because it entails bearing frustration. This is
difficult for all people. But it is particularly difficult for the person
with ADD who would rather deal with frustration by blowing it off, or
by reaching closure too quickly—even if that means sabotaging his
own interests—than by the excruciatingly painful ordeal of bearing
with it. Like sitting still in class, it is almost impossible for the child
or adult with ADD to sit still with frustration. (A practical suggestion
here is to encourage the person with ADD to pace about the room
while the negotiation is proceeding.)
With those cautions, are there some general principles that will aid
in negotiation in families? One of the best books written on the art of
negotiation comes from the Harvard Negotiation Project. It is

here is to encourage the person with ADD to pace about the room
while the negotiation is proceeding.)
With those cautions, are there some general principles that will aid
in negotiation in families? One of the best books written on the art of
negotiation comes from the Harvard Negotiation Project. It is

Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without Giving In, by Roger
Fisher and William Ury. Originally intended for application to
business and diplomacy, this book is better than almost any
psychology or family-therapy text for learning how to negotiate
effectively in families.
The authors recommend a method of negotiation they call
principled negotiation or negotiation on the merits. The method
rests on four basic points:
1. “People: Separate the people from the problem.”* The idea
here is to get people’s ego and pride disentangled from
whatever the problem is so that the problem can be attacked
without fear of attacking any person in the process. If the
person is attached to the problem, the person may never
change his mind, no matter how reasonable the solution,
because he doesn’t want to lose face.
2. “Interests: Focus on interests, not positions.” This is what
separates negotiation from debating. A debating team defends
—or attacks—a certain position, no matter what. It is its sole
interest to do that. Like an infantry, its position is its interest.
Negotiation should never become debating (or trench
warfare). In negotiation people have many interests, and it is
the interests, not some debating position, that need to be
satisfied. Indeed, one’s position may sometimes go against
one’s interests and one does not want to be so identified with
one’s position that one cannot change it. This is particularly
true with adolescents, who can back themselves into a corner
during an argument so that they end up, out of pride,
defending a position they really don’t want at all.
3. “Options: Generate a variety of possibilities before deciding
what to do.” This is particularly important in ADD families,
because it is the tendency of the person with the ADD to bring
premature closure to the discussion just to avoid bearing the

tension of the discussion itself. Don’t feel everything has to be
wrapped up in one meeting. Get the problem out and then let
everybody take a few days to think about it, to come up with
various options and solutions. It is much easier to think freely
when you are not under pressure. Be very careful not to bully
anyone into some agreement too soon.
4. “Criteria: Insist the result be based on some objective
standard.” This allows the members of the negotiation to
appeal to some standard other than their own will or opinion.
Examples of objective standards that might be useful in family
negotiations would be: What do other families in this area do
about this problem? What does the school recommend? What
would the open market pay for this service or item? What is
the relevant medical information regarding the safety of this
activity? What sort of practice schedule does the coach
recommend? What does the law say? Is there an agreed-upon
set of values or a religious concept that could help the
negotiation?
Often in family negotiations parents switch back and forth
between “hard” and “soft” negotiation. One day, or one moment, they
will be setting strict limits and proposing severe punishments. The
next day, or the next moment, they feel unhappy about their “hard”

set of values or a religious concept that could help the
negotiation?
Often in family negotiations parents switch back and forth
between “hard” and “soft” negotiation. One day, or one moment, they
will be setting strict limits and proposing severe punishments. The
next day, or the next moment, they feel unhappy about their “hard”
position and switch to a “soft” one, which also becomes ineffective.
One day Tommy is being thrown out of the house, and the next day
his mother may bake cookies for him in an effort to prop him up. In
principled negotiation, as described by Fisher and Ury, the idea is
neither to be soft nor hard but to negotiate on the merits, on the
principles and issues, always looking for ways of finding mutual gain,
and where interests conflict, reconciling them on the basis of some
fair standard rather than strength of will or power.
For example, in Tommy’s case it was important to get past the
power struggle between Tommy and his parents and into the

problem of managing school performance. As long as the power
struggle predominated, as long as the people were attached to the
problem, to use Fisher and Ury’s terminology, the Big Struggle would
go on. Once Tommy and his dad were able to meet amicably on some
common ground, true negotiation could begin.
After Tommy’s family had worked out their plan, something
happened that often happens in families with ADD. One member of
the family tried to rekindle the struggle. Tommy had agreed to go
over his homework every other day with a tutor. One night at dinner
Tommy’s brother, Alex, decided to tease Tommy about having to see
a tutor. “Tutors are for retards,” Alex said.
“Why don’t you go—” Tommy started.
“Wait a minute,” Mom interrupted. “Alex, why are you baiting
your brother? Can’t you see he’s trying? Would you like me to make
fun of you the next time Sharon McCall comes by?”
Alex blushed. Tommy laughed. For the time being, dinner
proceeded without mayhem.
Quashing the Big Struggle takes work—work on a daily basis. Like
weeds, it will come back if allowed to.
Here is a summary of some more of the principles of the
management of ADD in families.
TWENTY-FIVE TIPS ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ADD
WITHIN FAMILIES
1. Get an accurate diagnosis. This is the starting point of all
treatment for ADD.
2. Educate the family. All members of the family need to learn
the facts about ADD as the first step in the treatment. Many
problems will take care of themselves once all family members

understand what is going on. The education process should
take place with the entire family, if possible. Each member of
the family will have questions. Make sure all these questions
get answered.
3. Try to change the family “reputation” of the person with
ADD. Reputations within families, like reputations within
towns or organizations, keep a person in one set or mold.
Recasting within the family the reputation of the person with
ADD can set up brighter expectations. If you are expected to
screw up, you probably will; if you are expected to succeed,
you just might. It may be hard to believe at first, but having
ADD can be more a gift than a curse. Try to see and develop
the positive aspects of the person with ADD, and try to change
his family reputation to accentuate these positive aspects.
Remember, this person usually brings a special something to
the family—special energies, special creativity, special humor.
He (or she) usually livens up any gathering he attends, and

the positive aspects of the person with ADD, and try to change
his family reputation to accentuate these positive aspects.
Remember, this person usually brings a special something to
the family—special energies, special creativity, special humor.
He (or she) usually livens up any gathering he attends, and
even when he is disruptive, it’s usually exciting to have him
around. He punctures bombast and does not tolerate fools. He
is irreverent and not afraid to speak his mind. He has a lot to
give, and the family, more than any group of people, can help
him reach his potential.
4. Make it clear that ADD is nobody’s fault. It is not Mom’s or
Dad’s fault. It is not brother’s or sister’s fault. It is not
Grandmother’s fault, and it is not the fault of the person who
has ADD. It is nobody’s fault. It is extremely important that
this be understood and believed by all members of the family.
Lingering feelings that ADD is just an excuse for irresponsible
behavior or that ADD is caused by laziness will sabotage
treatment.
5. Also make it clear that ADD is a family issue. Unlike some
medical problems, ADD touches upon everybody in the family
in a daily, significant way. It affects early-morning behavior, it

affects dinner-table behavior, it affects vacations, and it
affects quiet time. Let each member of the family become a
part of the solution, just as each member of the family has
been a part of the problem.
6. Pay attention to the “balance of attention” within the
family. Try to correct any imbalance. Often, when one child
has ADD, his siblings get less attention. The attention may be
negative, but the child with ADD often gets more than his
share of parents’ time and attention day in and day out. This
imbalance of attention can create resentment among siblings,
as well as deprive them of what they need. Bear in mind that
being the sibling of a child with ADD carries its own special
burdens. Siblings need a chance to voice their concerns,
worries, resentments, and fears about what is going on.
Siblings need to be allowed to get angry as well as to help out.
Be careful not to let the attention in the family become so
imbalanced that the person with ADD is dominating the whole
family scene, defining every event, coloring every moment,
determining what can and cannot be done, controlling the
show.
7. Try to avoid the Big Struggle. A common entanglement in
families where ADD is present but not diagnosed, or
diagnosed but unsuccessfully treated, the Big Struggle pits the
child with ADD against his parents, or the adult with ADD
against his spouse, in a daily struggle of wills. The negativity
that suffuses the Big Struggle eats away at the whole family.
Just as denial and enabling can define the alcoholic family, so
can the Big Struggle define (and consume) the ADD family.
8. Once the diagnosis is made, and once the family
understands what ADD is, have everybody sit down together
and negotiate a deal. Using the principles outlined earlier, try
to negotiate your way toward a “game plan” that everyone in
the family can buy into. To avoid the family gridlock of the Big

8. Once the diagnosis is made, and once the family
understands what ADD is, have everybody sit down together
and negotiate a deal. Using the principles outlined earlier, try
to negotiate your way toward a “game plan” that everyone in
the family can buy into. To avoid the family gridlock of the Big

Struggle, or to avoid an ongoing war, it is wise to get into the
habit of negotiation. This can take a lot of work, but over time
negotiated settlements can usually be reached. The terms of
any settlement should be made explicit; at best they should be
put into writing so they can be referred to as needed. They
should include concrete agreements by all parties as to what is
promised, with contingency plans for meeting and not
meeting the goals. Let the war end with a negotiated peace.
9. If negotiation bogs down at home, consider seeing a family
therapist, a professional who has experience in helping
families listen to each other and reach consensus. Since
families can be explosive, it can be very helpful to have a
professional around to keep the explosions under control.
Also consider buying a book to help in negotiation, such as
Fisher and Ury’s Getting to Yes.
10. Within the context of family therapy, role-playing can be
helpful to let members of the family show each other how they
see them. Since people with ADD are very poor self-observers,
watching others play them can vividly demonstrate behavior
they may be unaware of rather than unwilling to change.
Video can help in this regard as well.
11. If you sense the Big Struggle is beginning, try to disengage
from it. Try to back away. Once it has begun, it is very hard to
get out of. The best way to stop it, on a day-to-day basis, is not
to join it in the first place. Beware of the struggle’s becoming
an irresistible force.
12. Give everyone in the family a chance to be heard. ADD
affects everyone in the family, some silently. Try to let those
who are in silence speak.
13. Try to break the negative process and turn it into a
positive one. Applaud and encourage success when it

happens. Try to get everyone pointed toward positive goals,
rather than gloomily assuming the inevitability of negative
outcomes. One of the most difficult tasks a family faces in
dealing with ADD is getting onto a positive track. However,
once this is done, the results can be fantastic. Use a good
family therapist, a good coach, whatever—just focus on
building positive approaches to each other and to the
problem.
14. Make it clear who has responsibility for what within the
family. Everybody needs to know what is expected of him or
her. Everybody needs to know what the rules are and what the
consequences are.
15. As a parent, avoid the pernicious pattern of loving the
child one day and hating him the next. One day he exasperates
you and you punish him and reject him. The next day he
delights you and you praise him and love him. It is true of all
children, but particularly true of those with ADD, that they
can be little demons one day and jewels of enchantment the
next. Try to keep on an even keel in response to these wide
fluctuations. If you fluctuate as much as the child, the family
system becomes very turbulent and unpredictable.
16. Make time for you and your spouse to confer with each
other. Try to present a united front. The less you can be
manipulated the better. Consistency helps in the treatment of
ADD.
17. Don’t keep ADD a secret from the extended family. It is

fluctuations. If you fluctuate as much as the child, the family
system becomes very turbulent and unpredictable.
16. Make time for you and your spouse to confer with each
other. Try to present a united front. The less you can be
manipulated the better. Consistency helps in the treatment of
ADD.
17. Don’t keep ADD a secret from the extended family. It is
nothing to be ashamed of, and the more the members of the
extended family know about what is going on, the more help
they can be. In addition, it would not be unlikely for one of
them to have it and not know about it as well.

18. Try to target problem areas. Typical problem areas include
study time, morning time, bedtime, dinnertime, times of
transition (leaving the house and the like), and vacations.
Once the problem area has been explicitly identified, everyone
can approach it more constructively. Negotiate with each
other as to how to make it better. Ask each other for specific
suggestions.
19. Have family brainstorming sessions. When a crisis is not
occurring, talk to each other about how a problem area might
be dealt with. Be willing to try anything once to see if it works.
Approach problems as a team with a positive, can-do attitude.
20. Make use of feedback from outside sources—teachers,
pediatrician, therapist, other parents and children. Sometimes
a person won’t listen to or believe something someone in the
family says, but will listen to it if it comes from the outside.
21. Try to accept ADD in the family just as you would any
other condition and normalize it in the eyes of all family
members as much as possible. Accommodate to it as you
might a family member’s special talents or interests like
musical ability or athletic skills whose development would
affect family routines. Accommodate to it, but try not to let it
dominate your family. In times of crisis this may not seem
possible, but remember that the worst of times do not last
forever.
22. ADD can drain a family. ADD can turn a family upside
down and make everybody angry at everybody else. Treatment
can take a long while to be effective. Sometimes the key to
success in treatment is just to persist and to keep a sense of
humor. Although it is hard not to get discouraged if things just
seem to get worse and worse, remember that the treatment of
ADD often seems ineffective for prolonged periods. Get a
second consultation, get additional help, but don’t give up.

23. Never worry alone. Try to cultivate as many supports as
possible. From pediatrician to family doctor to therapist, from
support group to professional organization to national
convention, from friends to relatives to teachers and schools,
make use of whatever supports you can find. It is amazing
how group support can turn a mammoth obstacle into a
solvable problem, and how it can help you keep your
perspective. You’ll find yourself saying, “You mean we’re not
the only family with this problem?” Even if this does not solve
the problem, it will make it feel more manageable, less strange
and threatening. Get support. Never worry alone.
24. Pay attention to boundaries and overcontrol within the
family. People with ADD often step over boundaries without
meaning to. It is important that each member of the family
know and feel that he or she is an individual, and not always
subject to the collective will of the family. In addition, the
presence of ADD in the family can so threaten parents’ sense

family. People with ADD often step over boundaries without
meaning to. It is important that each member of the family
know and feel that he or she is an individual, and not always
subject to the collective will of the family. In addition, the
presence of ADD in the family can so threaten parents’ sense
of control that one or another parent becomes a little tyrant,
fanatically insisting on control over all things all the time.
Such a hypercontrolling attitude raises the tension level
within the family and makes everybody want to rebel. It also
makes it difficult for family members to develop the sense of
independence they need to have to function effectively outside
the family.
25. Keep up hope. Hope is a cornerstone in the treatment of
ADD. Have someone in mind whom you can call who will hear
the bad news but also be able to pick up your spirits. Always
bear in mind the positive aspects of ADD—energy, creativity,
intuition, good-heartedness—and also bear in mind that
many, many people with ADD do very well in life. When ADD
seems to be sinking you and your family, remember, things
will get better.

ADD can tear families apart, no matter what the ages of the people
involved. George was a fifty-seven-year-old man who came from a
conservative, respectable New England family. He had bumped
around from job to job all his life, supporting his wife and children
but never living up to his potential or the higher expectations his
aristocratic family had for him. When he discovered, at age fiftyseven, that he had ADD, that indeed there was a reason for his
underachievement, he became elated and couldn’t wait to share the
news with his older sister, the family matriarch since his mother had
died. She responded coldly, saying, “I’m happy for you, George, if
you’ve found something that makes you happy.”
“I didn’t expect much,” George said. “Maybe just a ‘holy cow.’ But
nothing? I don’t understand it.”
George wrote the following letter just after talking to his sister, but
he did not mail it. He presented it to me during one of his sessions,
with this note as a preface: “An unsent letter to my older sister, a
seemingly ideal daughter, married to a business executive, having
become the seemingly ideal mother, wife, and pillar of her
community, a classic product of an ideal family. Since I shared the
recent discovery of my ADD with her in mid-March, I have not heard
from her. This is curious, since she pretty much spends her life doing
all good things to all who come in contact with her. As an exercise, I
have written this letter. Perhaps it will help me even if it never does
get sent.”
Dear Patricia,
As you are undoubtedly aware, it has been some time since we
have spoken. As I recall, it was mid-March when I called and
explained to you my revelation regarding the ADD. We spoke
again ever so briefly Easter weekend when you passed me rather
quickly (and rather unceremoniously, I might add) to David. I
actually tried to call you a couple of times without any luck, and,
as time passed, it became apparent that you were not making any

explained to you my revelation regarding the ADD. We spoke
again ever so briefly Easter weekend when you passed me rather
quickly (and rather unceremoniously, I might add) to David. I
actually tried to call you a couple of times without any luck, and,
as time passed, it became apparent that you were not making any

noticeable effort to reach me. As more time has passed, it seemed
appropriate to come at this from another direction. I am not sure
what is actually happening and, therefore, am unsure of proper
protocol, but I have decided to communicate my thoughts to you
as clearly and sincerely as I can.
As you may or may not know, ADD has only recently become
even reasonably understood with children and continues to cause
a good deal of uncertainty with regard to adults. What you may or
may not also know, is that … wait a minute, that’s not where I
want to head. Actually, sharing information about ADD is not
really the primary thrust here. What really interests me is trying
to explain a bit more about what is going on in my life and
perhaps have the opportunity to hear the same about you.
To review, my call to you in March was to share with you what
is unquestionably the single most significant realization of my
life. This ADD thing has not only silently blocked me from
successfully doing those things that have been expected of me,
but it has done so in such a way that I (along with most others
similarly blessed) came to believe that my inability to perform
was a matter of choice and therefore a massive character flaw. I
have genuinely felt that to be true for as long as I can remember.
In addition, it has been apparent to me as well as to all with
whom I have had contact that I have had the ability, intelligence,
good looks, sense of propriety, and whatever else seemed
important in the quest for success … another false start.
What I really want to know is, what the hell is going through
your head? Your brother for whom you have professed genuine
love and affection tells you that he has a neurological disorder of
extremely significant proportion, ADD, and that its by-products
have literally warped my every action, relationship, and thought.
Why have you not offered me encouragement, sympathy,
expressions of interest, or anything of the sort? If for some reason
you feel none of those things, why have you not indignantly

confronted me as a sham, an embarrassment, a blemish on our
all-American family picture? Why in the bloody hell have you not
done anything at all? Am I that insignificant a pimple of irritation
to your fat-ass, do-gooder life that you don’t even deem me
worthy of a snappy, superior (perhaps even condescending)
retort?
None of these options makes any sense at all, Patty. I am your
brother, George. I have a neurological impairment called
attention deficit disorder. It is no one’s fault that I have it and no
one has intentionally contributed to the effects it has had on me.
While I am not angry or bitter about it, it has caused me no end of
trouble in doing even the most simple of things that I have
expected of myself and others have expected of me. I have not
had control over those functions of my mind that allow me to
sustain interest in almost anything of significance in my life. I
have appeared to myself and to others to be lazy and
unmotivated, wasteful of an abundance of natural talent. This has
become so chronically discouraging that I have not been able to

had control over those functions of my mind that allow me to
sustain interest in almost anything of significance in my life. I
have appeared to myself and to others to be lazy and
unmotivated, wasteful of an abundance of natural talent. This has
become so chronically discouraging that I have not been able to
generate a whit of real enthusiasm for anything (other than
getting out of my debt) for a long, long time. This is not a figment
of my imagination or some café syndrome to be used as an excuse
for a failed life. As it affects me, it also affects thousands of others
like me. There is no doubt about my diagnosis. It has been
confirmed conclusively by three independent specialists in adult
ADD. I have read account after account of how people have lived
with ADD unknown to them and, for most, I could have written
the anecdotes myself. The diagnostic definitions fit as though
they were written to describe me. Lucky me, though, I am not in
jail like lots of ADD aficionados, or an alcoholic, or any one of a
number of other distasteful, yet not uncommon, ends.
I am now in the process of trying various combinations of
medicine that will allow me to control the focus of my mind. At
the same time, I am trying to unravel years of creative behavior
patterns that have provided variations of success, failure,

frustration, confusion, and even some laughs. While I am not
convinced that I am blessed to have this insidious thriller, I do
recognize that I am at least better off knowing about it than
bluffing my way through the duration of a life that hasn’t actually
been that much fun.
Would you please let me know what is going through your
mind? I am not expecting any particular attitude from you. What
I do want is to know your honest feelings whatever they may be.
It would be nice if our past relationship of blood, family, and
sharing of life experience could continue on some positive level,
but if that is somehow not something that can work for you, I can
deal with it. Why don’t you just let me know.
Sincerely,
Your brother,
George 
After some consideration George decided not to send the letter. “I
think it’s time for me to give up trying to get some sort of approval
from her that she will never be able to give. I don’t know why at my
age I should even want it. But I do.”
Over time George began to get that approval from others, and
mostly from himself. His lifelong struggle could at last be
understood, at least by himself and by his wife and children. His
ordeal would have been eased, however, if his sister could have
understood his situation.
Families in general have tremendous power both to heal and to
inflict pain. If the family is willing to cast a new eye upon a
chronically wounded member, if the family is willing to help heal
him, it can be more effective than all the medications, therapies, and
incantations ever devised. However, if the family is unwilling to look
differently upon its George, if the family instead sneers and snorts,

inflict pain. If the family is willing to cast a new eye upon a
chronically wounded member, if the family is willing to help heal
him, it can be more effective than all the medications, therapies, and
incantations ever devised. However, if the family is unwilling to look
differently upon its George, if the family instead sneers and snorts,

“Just another one of your lame excuses! Why don’t you just shape
up?” then the family can undermine whatever good treatment he
may receive. Few of us ever outgrow the power of our families both
to deflate us and to fill us up. Few of us ever get past the wish for love
and approval from mother or father, sibling or kin. That wish can be
used in our favor, to support us as the wish is granted, or it can be
used in our destruction as the wish is perpetually denied.
For the family to use its considerable power to heal, it must be
willing to accept the challenge of change. All groups, most especially
families, feel threatened by a change in the status quo, no matter
how bad the status quo may be. As the person with ADD seeks to
change, he is also asking his family to change with him. This is never
easy. It is not the troubled family that has a hard time with change; it
is all families. But with education and information as guides, with
encouragement and support as reinforcers, most families can
successfully adapt. As there is less suffering in the family system, life
at home can even be fun.
* Quotation marks set off direct quotations from Getting to Yes:
Negotiating Agreement Without Giving In, rev. ed., by Roger Fisher,
William Ury, and Bruce Patton (Penguin Books, 1991), pp. 10–11.

6

PARTS OF THE ELEPHANT

SUBTYPES OF ADD
We do not yet have one concise definition for ADD. Instead, we have
to rely on descriptions of symptoms to define ADD. Often the
descriptions focus on one part of the syndrome or another,
highlighting this aspect or that, in a way that is reminiscent of the
story of the blind men describing an elephant. One blind man feels
the trunk and describes something long and tubular emitting warm
air. Another feels the tail and describes something narrow and
pliable. Another feels a leg and describes something like a tree trunk.
Still another feels the belly and describes something massive yet
spongy. None of the blind men is able to step back and see the
elephant as a whole.
So it can be with ADD. When we focus in on one part of the
syndrome, we are at risk of overlooking another, quite different part.
For example, if we focus in on inattentiveness, we can overlook the
fact that most people with ADD can hyperfocus at times. Or if we
focus in on hyperactivity, we can overlook the many people with
ADD who are quiet and daydreamy. It is difficult to step back and see
that all of these aspects are part of a greater whole. By examining the
various parts, or subtypes, of ADD, however, one can gain a better
understanding of this complex syndrome. The formal diagnostic
nomenclature recognizes only two subtypes of ADD: ADD with
hyperactivity and ADD without hyperactivity. ADD in children and
ADD in adults constitutes another broad classification.
We would like to introduce some other subtypes, not all formally
recognized, but, based upon our clinical experience, useful in
identifying the most common and distinct ways in which ADD is
manifested. Because many of the secondary symptoms associated
with ADD develop over time, these subtypes apply mainly to ADD as
it is seen in adults. We list them, roughly speaking, in descending
order of frequency.
The subtypes include:

1. ADD without hyperactivity
2. ADD with anxiety
3. ADD with depression
4. ADD with other learning disorders
5. ADD with agitation or mania
6. ADD with substance abuse
7. ADD in the creative person
8. ADD with high-risk behavior, or “high-stim” ADD
9. ADD with dissociative states
10. ADD with borderline personality features
11. ADD with conduct disorder or oppositional disorder (in
children) or antisocial personality features (in adults)
12. ADD with obsessive-compulsive disorder
13. Pseudo-ADD

ADD without Hyperactivity
One of the most common misconceptions about attention deficit
disorder is that it only occurs with hyperactivity. Many people
believe that if the child is not “bouncing off the walls,” then he or she
does not have ADD. If the child is not a behavior problem, or a
discipline problem, or at least a fidgety nudge, then the child does
not have ADD. Or, if the adult is not a restless whirling dervish, then
he or she cannot have ADD. The diagnosis seems to rest, in many
people’s minds, upon the symptom of motoric hyperactivity.
While untrue, this is understandable. ADD was first described in
the population of hyperactive children. Our comprehension of the
disorder is rooted in studies of hyperactive kids. It is only fairly
recently that we have come to understand that ADD can occur
without hyperactivity, or, for that matter, that it can occur in adults.
Just as reputations die hard, so does dated knowledge fade slowly.
But the evidence now shows that there are hosts of children and

disorder is rooted in studies of hyperactive kids. It is only fairly
recently that we have come to understand that ADD can occur
without hyperactivity, or, for that matter, that it can occur in adults.
Just as reputations die hard, so does dated knowledge fade slowly.
But the evidence now shows that there are hosts of children and
adults who have all the other symptoms of ADD but who are not
hyperactive, or even overactive. If anything, they are motorically
slow, even languid.
These are the daydreamers. These are the kids—often girls—who
sit in the back of the class and twirl their hair through their fingers
while staring out the window and thinking long, long thoughts. These
are the adults who drift off during conversations or in the midst of
reading a page. These are the people, often highly imaginative, who
are building stairways to heaven in the midst of conversations, or
writing plays in their minds while not finishing their day’s work, or
nodding agreeably and politely while not hearing what is being said
at all. They steal away silently, without the noisemaking of their
hyperactive brethren, but they steal away just the same.
Perhaps due to the manner in which the ADD gene is expressed, or
due to the absence of the Y chromosome, girls seem to have ADD

without hyperactivity more often than boys do. It can occur in both
sexes, but it is more common in girls or women.
Usually in these people the core symptom is distractibility. It is a
quiet phenomenon, their shifting of attention. It happens as silently,
but as definitely, as a cut in a film sequence. Imagine, one moment
you are in one place, and in the next moment you are somewhere
else. You don’t really notice it. Rather you go along with it, as you go
along with a cut in a movie. The narrative carries you, as you view
your own internal story, your own internal screening of the day’s
events.
In some ways it is a charming symptom. The mind meanders like a
brook, winding through the contours of the land, bending here,
falling there, quietly making its way, in its own time, to some larger
river of thought.
But in other ways it is anything but charming. It can be downright
disabling not to be able to rely on your own mind to remember
things, to prompt you to get to places on time, to keep you involved
in a conversation when you want to be, or focused on a page you
really do want to read, or concentrated on a project you need to
complete. The meandering brook, in its desultory way, seems to be
forever carrying you away from where you want to be.
“I can be working on a project at my desk,” reports one patient,
“when, without really knowing it, I begin to think about some other
idea my work suggests. Then I follow that thought, or I may even
leave my desk to go get something, and by the time I’ve gone to get
the thing, I’ve forgotten what it was I was going to get. I’m almost
sleepwalking. Hours can pass in this unfocused state. Lots of
interesting thoughts pass by, I can be engaged in lots of creative
enterprises, but relatively little gets done. I can combat it consciously
for a few minutes, but the moment I get into anything, the moment I
stop monitoring what I’m doing and get into the flow of the work,

sleepwalking. Hours can pass in this unfocused state. Lots of
interesting thoughts pass by, I can be engaged in lots of creative
enterprises, but relatively little gets done. I can combat it consciously
for a few minutes, but the moment I get into anything, the moment I
stop monitoring what I’m doing and get into the flow of the work,

then I’m at the mercy of my whims. If I could just stay focused for
even one hour, I could probably get my whole day’s work done.”
After this woman was treated for ADD, her life changed. “It was
amazing,” she says. “I didn’t really feel any different, but I started
getting all my work done. Projects I’d had on the back burner for
years began to get finished, and at the end of a day I couldn’t believe
how much I’d actually accomplished. But it was more than just my
productivity that changed. My whole way of looking at myself
changed, too. I stopped thinking of myself as some kind of spaceshot
and started realizing I was just as smart as anybody else. I started
realizing I was not defective. In fact, I was pretty good. It was quite a
change, I can tell you. My only regret is that I didn’t find out about
my condition sooner in my life.”
Many factors other than ADD can contribute to an inability to
focus consistently. The most common of these include the hectic
pace of everyday life, traumatic events in the present or the past,
depression, substance abuse or overuse of prescribed medication,
anxiety disorders, grief reactions, major life changes, and various
medical conditions, such as certain seizure disorders, that require a
visit with a physician to evaluate. However, the cause may also be
untreated ADD.
Particularly when hyperactivity is not present, the diagnosis of
ADD is easy to miss. The individual simply appears to be one of the
many people who “can’t get their act together.” You want to take
them and shake them and say, “Shape up! Get with it! Don’t you
realize you’re frittering your life away?!” But if someone in the
person’s life could stop to consider that the problem might be rooted
in something more complex than laziness or general fecklessness,
then a new light could shine on the situation, and, perhaps, a better
life could begin.

ADD with Anxiety
For some people, the experience of ADD is one of chronic anxiety.
What bothers them most is not the inattentiveness or impulsivity of
ADD, but the attendant anxiety they so frequently feel.
This anxiety can be separated into two parts, one logical and
obvious, the other irrational and hidden. The “logical” anxiety is the
anxiety that one would expect to feel if one were chronically
forgetting obligations, daydreaming, speaking or acting impulsively,
being late, not meeting deadlines—all the typical symptoms of ADD.
Living in such a state naturally leaves one feeling anxious: What have
I forgotten? What will go wrong next? How can I keep track of all the
balls I have in the air?
The hidden anxiety is hard to believe, but we see it frequently in
clinical practice. This is the anxiety or worry that the individual
actively seeks out. The person with “anxious ADD” often starts the
day, or any moment of repose, by rapidly scanning his or her mental
horizon in search of something to worry about. Once a subject of
worry has been located, the individual locks in on it like a heatsensing rocket and doesn’t let go. No matter how trivial the subject
or how painful the worry, the individual keeps the worry alive,

day, or any moment of repose, by rapidly scanning his or her mental
horizon in search of something to worry about. Once a subject of
worry has been located, the individual locks in on it like a heatsensing rocket and doesn’t let go. No matter how trivial the subject
or how painful the worry, the individual keeps the worry alive,
returning to it magnetically, obsessively. Some of these people do in
fact have obsessive-compulsive disorder, but the majority do not.
They are actually using worry as a means of organizing their
thinking. Better to have the pain of worry, they seem to feel, than to
have the disquietude of chaos.
Listen to one patient’s description: “The minute I have my mind
cleared of one problem, I go out and look for another. They are
usually really stupid things like an unpaid bill or something someone
said to me two days before or whether or not I’m too fat. But I brood
over them until they ruin my whole mood.”
This tendency to organize around worry defines the subtype of
ADD with anxiety. It is common. Why is it so persistent? In part

because the individual doesn’t know why he’s doing it. Like most
habits of mind, it persists until insight can begin to try to change it.
Another explanation for this ruminative, often extremely painful
style of thinking has to do with what we call the startle response in
ADD. It is a sequence of events that goes as follows:
1. Something “startles” the brain. It may be a transition, like
waking up, or going from one appointment to the next, or it
may be the completion of a task, or the receiving of some piece
of news. It may be, and usually is, trivial, but the “startle”
requires some reorganization on the part of the brain.
2. A minipanic ensues. The mind doesn’t know where to look
or what to do. It has been focused on one thing and is now
being asked to change sets. This is very disorganizing. So the
mind reaches out for something red-hot, something to focus
on. Since worry is so “hot,” and therefore so organizing, the
mind finds something to worry about.
3. Anxious rumination replaces panic. While anxious
rumination is painful, it is at least organized. One can say over
and over in one’s mind, thousands of times a day, “Will I get
my taxes paid on time?” or “Does that look she gave me mean
she is angry with me?” or “Did I pass the exam?” The panic
induced by the “startle” is replaced by the focused ache of
anxious rumination.
The whole point of the sequence is to avoid chaos. No one likes
chaos, but most people can endure milliseconds, or even seconds, of
it as they go from one task to another, one state to another, one
stimulus to another. The ADD mind often cannot. Instead, it fixates
on worry and gets organized—or stuck—around it.

ADD with Depression
Sometimes the first symptom that brings a person with ADD to a
psychiatrist is some form of mood disorder, particularly depression.
While ADD is usually defined in terms of other symptoms—
distractibility, impulsivity, and restlessness—and consequently is not
considered when someone says he or she is depressed, the fact is that
ADD and depression frequently coexist.
This is not hard to understand when one considers the typical life
experience of someone with ADD. Since childhood, the person with
ADD has felt a sense of chronic frustration and failure.
Underachieving all along, accused of being stupid or lazy or
stubborn, finding the demands of everyday life extraordinarily

This is not hard to understand when one considers the typical life
experience of someone with ADD. Since childhood, the person with
ADD has felt a sense of chronic frustration and failure.
Underachieving all along, accused of being stupid or lazy or
stubborn, finding the demands of everyday life extraordinarily
difficult to keep up with, tuning out instead of tuning in, missing the
mark time and again, living with an overflow of energy but an
undersupply of self-esteem, the individual with ADD can feel that it
is just not worth it to try anymore, that life is too hard, too much of a
struggle, that perhaps it would be better if life were to end than go
on.
It is heartening how valiantly people with undiagnosed ADD try in
the face of their despair. They don’t give up. They keep pushing. Even
when they’ve been knocked down many times before, they stand up
to get knocked down again. It is hard to keep them down for good.
They tend not to feel sorry for themselves. Rather, they tend to get
mad, to get up, to have at it again. In this sense one might say they
are stubborn: they just don’t give up. But they may remain
depressed.
While life experience can lead to some of the depression one often
sees among people with ADD, there may be a biological factor at
work as well. It may be that ADD partakes of a common
pathophysiology with biological depression (i.e., depression not
caused by life events but by biology). That is to say ADD and
biological depression may be physiologically, and genetically, related.

Whatever goes wrong in depression, whatever the “patho” part of the
physiology is, that part may also go wrong in ADD.
James Hudson and Harrison Pope at the Harvard Medical School,
in their innovative research, have speculated that eight separate
disorders, among them depression and ADD, may share a common
physiologic abnormality. They call the group affective spectrum
disorder. (It also includes bulimia, obsessive-compulsive disorder,
cataplexy, migraine, panic disorder, and irritable-bowel syndrome.)
The grouping is supported by response to similar medications, as
well as by clinical evidence. If, as is the case, a medication that
successfully treats major depression also successfully treats ADD,
might we not suppose that there is a link between the two disorders?
Although it is not necessarily so—indeed, there are unrelated
disorders in medicine that the same medication treats—it is worth
wondering about. Hudson and Pope did just that. Their research
shows strong evidence for a physiologic linkage among the eight
disorders they include within the “affective spectrum.”
On the basis of both biology and life experience, then, it is not
surprising to find depression associated with ADD.
Often, however, the mood problem in ADD is subtle. It is not
severe enough to be called depression, but it is more severe than the
ordinary dips in mood of everyday life. Listen to this description
from a patient:
I don’t think I’ve ever really been happy. For as long as I can
remember, there’s always been a sadness tugging at me.
Sometimes I forget about it. I guess that’s when you could say I
was happy. But the minute I start to think, then the bad feeling
comes back. It isn’t despair. I’ve never attempted suicide or
anything like that. It’s just that I’ve never felt good, about myself
or about life or about the future. It’s all been an uphill battle. I
guess I always thought that’s just what life was—one long series of

was happy. But the minute I start to think, then the bad feeling
comes back. It isn’t despair. I’ve never attempted suicide or
anything like that. It’s just that I’ve never felt good, about myself
or about life or about the future. It’s all been an uphill battle. I
guess I always thought that’s just what life was—one long series of
disappointments interrupted by moments of hope.

This patient’s description brings to mind a remark made by
Samuel Johnson, a man for whom there is ample evidence of having
ADD and depression. Johnson observed that “life is a process not
from pleasure to pleasure, but from hope to hope.” Elsewhere he
wrote, “Life is a state everywhere in which there is much to be
endured and little to be enjoyed.” He also said that “we live in a
world that is bursting with sin and sorrow.”
Such persistent sadness, or lack of pleasure, often accompanies
ADD. Sometimes, when the ADD is treated, the sadness lifts. As if a
mote had been removed from the eye, the person can see pleasure
where there had only been confusion or a blur. In people with this
subtype of ADD the distractibility that is part of the syndrome
interferes with the process of apprehending pleasure, of perceiving
order, and of sensing that life can be all right.
It had never occurred to the patient quoted above that matters
could work out in her life because she never recognized it when they
did. She was always distracted by some relatively benign worry. But
she was so distractible, so subject to the disruptions the worries
caused her, that she could never see the forest for the trees. Her
sense of chronic disappointment was as much a function of her
inability to perceive order or stability in her world as it was of actual
failures.
We are not suggesting here that all depression is due to ADD. Far
from it. However, there are some people who are chronically sad who
do in fact have ADD and don’t know it.
The primary disorder—an inability to attend—can lead to the
secondary problem of depression. Or the two—ADD and depression
—may coexist, both arising independently from the same
physiological abnormality.

ADD with Other Learning Disorders
The pain of a learning disorder resides not only in the strain one feels
in trying to function but in the disconnections one can suffer, a
disconnection from language and from thought, from expression and
creativity, from books and from words, as well as from people and
from feelings.
Equally, it can be said, I believe, that one of the pleasures of the
various disorders is the fanciful variations they bring up. While the
child with dyslexia or ADD may stammer, stumble, and reverse,
while he may disconnect from the word or the page or the person, he
may also soar. He may connect in new and unexpected ways. He
may, in his stumbling, stumble onto something new and wonderful.
It is therefore vital that we keep the windows of these children’s
minds clean, that we keep them free of the smudge and grease of
shame, criticism, defeatism, and devaluation.
Let me tell a story. There was once a little boy who was
pronounced writing-phobic. This pronouncement was made by a
psychologist. “Karl is writing-phobic,” the report read. “I reach this
conclusion based upon psychometric testing as well as projective
testing which reveals a partial inability to retrieve certain words
under stress as well as an incomplete release of the preverbal
memory structures as initiated by image recall and impromptu

psychologist. “Karl is writing-phobic,” the report read. “I reach this
conclusion based upon psychometric testing as well as projective
testing which reveals a partial inability to retrieve certain words
under stress as well as an incomplete release of the preverbal
memory structures as initiated by image recall and impromptu
stimulation. This leads to a relative inhibition of the capacity to form
written expressives, that is to say a tendency to avoid external
prompts or stressors related to the act of writing. These neurological
factors are complicated, on a psychodynamic level, by the fact that
Karl has a precocious awareness of his parents’ own internal
conflicts. For a boy of eight, he displays an unusual understanding of
his mother’s unfulfilled literary ambitions as well as his father’s
shame-slash-pride over certain verbal successes vis-à-vis his own
career, namely that he is a successful writer for what are commonly
referred to as television sitcoms. Thus, the neurological and the
psychodynamic combine to create in Karl an intense ambivalence as
to whether or not he wants to write, whether or not he should write,

whether or not he can write, and what, exactly it means to write.
Until these issues are resolved he will remain writing-phobic. It is my
advice not to tamper with this delicate balance, but rather to respect
Karl’s defensive structure and wait for the issues to resolve. Failing
this, resource room time might prove invaluable.”
My friend, Priscilla Vail, a learning specialist, read this report and
laughed out loud. “What does this mean?” she asked herself. Not
quite believing the report, Priscilla decided to take a different tack
from the one the psychologist had recommended. She told Karl that
as much as he might want to write, he would have to constrain all his
written output within the bounds of one three-by-five note card per
day. She then began to work with him on all sorts of fun projects that
involved writing—games, puzzles, mazes, wish lists, fan letters. In no
time Karl was asking for a bigger note card. “I don’t know about
that,” Priscilla said, stroking her chin. “That’s an awful lot of space
you’d have to fill.”
“Oh, please, Mrs. Vail!” Karl pleaded.
“Well, if you think you can handle it—”
“Handle it?” Karl interrupted. “I can handle much more than
that!” he said proudly.
Soon Karl’s written output exceeded that of most professional
writers. The “writing phobia” and the resource room were forgotten
as Karl eagerly got busy with words without knowing that he wasn’t
supposed to be able to.
I think people come to words much as lovers get together. They
stumble onto each other, at the oddest of times, in the strangest of
places. They will meet in an empty laundromat on a rainy Sunday
afternoon, or they will catch each other’s eyes across a ballroom
dance floor in the middle of a wedding waltz. They will meet without
appointment and strike up a relationship without an agenda. There
may be a long courtship or a whirlwind romance. There may be

places. They will meet in an empty laundromat on a rainy Sunday
afternoon, or they will catch each other’s eyes across a ballroom
dance floor in the middle of a wedding waltz. They will meet without
appointment and strike up a relationship without an agenda. There
may be a long courtship or a whirlwind romance. There may be

protracted avoidance, even what looks like a phobia, as in Karl’s case,
or there may be an instant avidity, what amounts to love at first
sight. Some carry on a kind of epistolary relationship with words,
expressing their feelings through the formal prose of elegant notes,
while others jump at words and bark them out at the world in the
immediate poetry of certain street-corner vendors. Some slap their
words up on posters on telephone poles, while others keep them in
reserve, like a pistol concealed in a pocketbook. Some read haltingly,
like the nervous lover, hat in hand, while others seem born to orate.
We all woo language differently, and language grants us her favors in
different ways. Sometimes the relationship takes off, although it is
rare there is a ride without bumps. While utterly beautiful, endlessly
varied, and thoroughly transfixing, language can also be frustrating,
confusing, exasperating, and unforgiving.
Priscilla Vail, one of the great couples counselors we have for
troubled-language relationships, knew intuitively and from great
experience how to bring Karl together with words. She knew how to
coax him from the periphery and onto the dance floor. She knew if
she played the right music and showed him a few simple steps, the
allure of the dance would overcome Karl’s shy way with words.
Priscilla knew what all who work with words know: that one’s
language is not an inert tool that you take down from the shelf like a
hammer. Rather, it is a living companion, whose company you keep
for most of your waking life. For many people language is a best
friend they take for granted.
For some others, though, language never comes easily. The
company of words is always an effort to keep. These people—and I
count myself among them as one who is dyslexic and has ADD—
never know quite what to expect from words. Our relationship with
words is rooted in unpredictability. One moment we are Abraham
Lincoln composing a Gettysburg Address, and the next moment we
are as clumsy with words as a boy on his first date.

When I was in high school, back in the sixties, the classification of
learning disorders was really pretty simple. There was basically one
learning disorder: stupidity. And there was basically one treatment:
work harder. Oh, people talked a good game about “special help” and
tutoring, and we all knew that some people were good at math and
others were good at English and a lucky few were good at both, and
some people had heard of dyslexia, but we had no more sophisticated
understanding of what was going on than that.
Now the science of learning has grown in scope and depth. Of
course, as our knowledge has increased, matters have grown more
complicated. The jargon in the field is cumbersome and test reports
are often difficult to comprehend. The terms tossed around include
“auditory processing problem,” “visual-spatial dysfunction,”
“receptive language disorder,” “nonverbal learning disability,”
“word-retrieval problem,” “language-based learning disorder,” etc.
All very pungent concepts, but almost impossible to keep straight

are often difficult to comprehend. The terms tossed around include
“auditory processing problem,” “visual-spatial dysfunction,”
“receptive language disorder,” “nonverbal learning disability,”
“word-retrieval problem,” “language-based learning disorder,” etc.
All very pungent concepts, but almost impossible to keep straight
unless you deal with them every day. Experts in the field appropriate
their own set of terms and then compete with each other to see
whose lexicon will win out. Committees meet and decree terms and
then they meet again and change the terms just as you’ve learned the
first set. The committee that convened to write the definition of ADD
for the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
fourth edition (or, for short, DSM-IV-TR), will come out with a new
definition for DSM-V in 2013.
One can hardly hope that science will slow down so that we can
keep up with its nomenclature. However, it is important not to be
intimidated by science. Too often, practitioners in the field of
learning problems and ADD confuse rather than clarify through their
use of arcane terms or references. One should be able to gain access
to the important information in this field without the use of a
translator’s dictionary.
Priscilla Vail’s term for many of the children we have described in
this book is “conundrum kids.” These kids don’t fit any one mold

exactly, and we can’t explain all of what is going on. These kids
puzzle us as they flounder one day and shine the next, read to beat
the band one day and stare out the window the next, solve complex
math problems in their spare time but find themselves unable to do
any of the math on the test. Anyone who would like to know these
children well—and how to help them—should read Priscilla Vail,
especially Smart Kids with School Problems, or check out
Superparenting for ADD, which I wrote with Peter S. Jensen.
While the conundrum kids (or, for that matter, the conundrum
adults) puzzle us, one part of the puzzle they present is often ADD. In
dealing with ADD it is important to know that it is often
accompanied by other difficulties in learning. Depending upon what
difficulty you are referring to and how you define it, the incidence of
other learning disorders coexisting with ADD ranges from 10 percent
to 80 percent. Much of the variability here has to do with definition.
An excellent book that sorts out the various terms and gives lucid
explanation to them all is Diagnosing Learning Disorders by Bruce
Pennington, now in its second edition. Another example of a clear
writer in an unclear field, Pennington brings together research and
interpretation in a framework that is useful to both the lay and
professional reader.
In Pennington’s neuropsychological framework, ADD is one of
several so-called learning disorders. A learning disorder refers to a
problem in the individual’s neuropsychological system that adversely
affects school performance. One can, of course, underachieve in
school without having a learning disorder if the poor performance is
due entirely to emotional or social factors. Mental retardation
constitutes one large grouping of learning disorders, while
Pennington’s book takes in the others. The disorders he discusses
include, in decreasing order of frequency, dyslexia and other
developmental language disorders, ADD, right-hemisphere learning
disorders (which include specific problems with math, handwriting,

constitutes one large grouping of learning disorders, while
Pennington’s book takes in the others. The disorders he discusses
include, in decreasing order of frequency, dyslexia and other
developmental language disorders, ADD, right-hemisphere learning
disorders (which include specific problems with math, handwriting,
and art, as well as associated problems with social cognition), autism
spectrum disorder, and acquired memory disorders (most commonly

due to a closed head injury or a seizure disorder). Learning
disabilities—specific problems with math, reading, or language—are
a subset of learning disorders in Pennington’s classification.
ADD, then, is one kind of learning disorder. It may be
accompanied by other learning disorders, such as dyslexia or an
acquired memory disorder. It may also be accompanied by a specific
learning disability, such as a math disability.
This distinction between disorder and disability may be confusing
at first. The disabilities are a subset of the disorders. The disabilities
impair specific abilities: math disability, language disability, spelling
disability. The disorders, on the other hand, are not so specific; they
affect cognition in general.
Since ADD affects all areas of cognition, it will exacerbate any
learning disability. ADD is not a specific learning disability in itself;
it does not disable any one cognitive function, but is broader than
that. A specific math disability may often be found with ADD, as may
other specific learning disabilities, particularly difficulty in learning
foreign languages.
Math difficulties warrant careful evaluation. There are different
kinds of math problems, ranging from culturally induced problems
as may be found among girls who are brought up to believe they
should be bad at math and over time become math-phobic, to
neurologically based learning difficulties. There are different kinds of
difficulties among the neurologically based, some having to do with
problems with spatial relations, others having to do with
conceptualization, others having to do with memory and dataprocessing. Once you understand precisely what kind of difficulty
you are dealing with, you are then equipped to make the delicate
decision of how far to push. There is remedial help available for math
disabilities and language disabilities. The help ranges from tutoring
to the use of special devices such as Cuisenaire rods (manipulable
colored sticks of different lengths that help little children learn

calculation) to special schools where intensive support and technical
expertise may be found. The special assistance can help a great deal,
but it is not curative. The disability does not go away; one simply
learns to cope with it as best one can.
When do you decide that the individual has worked long and hard
enough at math or at a foreign language before letting it drop? This
kind of decision is best made in concert with the school, the family,
the individual, and a learning specialist. You do not want to give up
too soon, thus limiting what the person can learn. On the other hand,
you do not want to slog away endlessly with no apparent gain, losing
time and self-esteem in the process. The matter should be evaluated
repeatedly, and programs should allow flexibility so that the
individual can learn as much as possible without damage to selfconfidence.
The most common learning disorder, and the one about which we

you do not want to slog away endlessly with no apparent gain, losing
time and self-esteem in the process. The matter should be evaluated
repeatedly, and programs should allow flexibility so that the
individual can learn as much as possible without damage to selfconfidence.
The most common learning disorder, and the one about which we
know the most, is dyslexia. Its prevalence in this country, depending
on how it is defined, is from 10 to 30 percent. Briefly stated, dyslexia
is a problem with reading or writing one’s native language that
cannot be explained by some other cause such as limited schooling,
poor vision or hearing, brain damage or retardation. Since not all
dyslexia is the same, we should probably refer to it in the plural, the
dyslexias. Some dyslexics have particular trouble spelling. Others are
what used to be called “mirror readers,” reversing letters in words,
reading “was” for “saw” and so forth. Others do not reverse letters
per se, but anticipate letters or sounds incorrectly, and so misread
words, for example mistaking “battlefield” for “bachelor” or
“filament” for “firmament” or even “metaphor” for “medical.”
According to the work of Albert Galaburda at Harvard, the brains of
dyslexics appear to be different from normal brains in that they have
aberrant nodules on the cerebral cortex. These nodules may interfere
with how the brain perceives and processes the phonemes or sound
bits that make up words. The underlying phonological processing
problem in turn leads to the problems in reading, spelling, and
writing characteristic of the dyslexias. The primary symptoms of

ADD—erratic attention span, impulsivity, and restlessness—can
make reading difficult, and therefore can mimic dyslexia. However,
the two are separate disorders. The distinction is of practical
significance because the treatments for the two conditions are
different.
The two disorders can coexist or they can occur separately. In
terms of overlap, ADD occurs more frequently among dyslexics than
in the population at large. However, there is not an increased
incidence of dyslexia among the ADD population. Put differently, you
are more likely than the average person to have ADD if you have
dyslexia; but you are no more likely than the average person to have
dyslexia if you have ADD.
Auditory processing problems also occur frequently with ADD. As
the term suggests, an auditory processing problem interferes with
the brain’s ability to comprehend fully what it “hears.” The child or
adult with this problem has no hearing deficiency; sound enters the
brain without problems. However, once the sound gets into the
brain, the cerebral cortex has trouble processing it or fully making
sense of it.
For example, a child in class may “hear” the teacher say “George
Washington was the first president of the United States” but
comprehend it as “George Washington is the president of the United
States.” If, when asked about George Washington, he repeats his
“revised” version, he will appear foolish or stupid.
Or a child may have trouble socially because he or she does not
process properly what is being said. The same problems can affect an
adult, both at work and socially.
We do not yet appreciate how profoundly auditory processing
problems interfere with learning and interacting with others.
Particularly in individuals who also have ADD, auditory processing
problems can greatly interfere with everyday life.

process properly what is being said. The same problems can affect an
adult, both at work and socially.
We do not yet appreciate how profoundly auditory processing
problems interfere with learning and interacting with others.
Particularly in individuals who also have ADD, auditory processing
problems can greatly interfere with everyday life.

A learning disorder, whatever the definition or cause, usually
hurts. As an example, consider this, from the novelist John Irving’s
recollections of his days as a student at Phillips Exeter Academy:
I simply accepted the conventional wisdom of the day—I was a
struggling student; therefore, I was stupid.
I was such a poor student, I needed five years to pass the threeyear foreign language requirement; and in my fifth year at Exeter
—in my second “senior” year—I was taking Math III for the
second time (I had already taken Math II twice). I was such a
weak student, I passed Latin I with a D—and flunked Latin II;
then I switched to Spanish, which I barely survived.…
I wasn’t diagnosed as learning-disabled or dyslexic at Exeter; I
was just plain stupid. I failed a spelling test and was put in a
remedial spelling class; because I couldn’t learn how to spell—I
still can’t spell—I was advised to see the school psychiatrist! This
advice made no sense to me then—it makes no sense to me now—
but if you were a poor student at Exeter, you would develop such
a lasting sense of inferiority that you’d probably be in need of a
psychiatrist one day.…
I wish I’d known, when I was a student at Exeter, that there
was a word for what made being a student so hard for me; I wish
I could have said to my friends that I was dyslexic, or learningdisabled. Instead, I kept quiet, or—to my closest friends—I made
bad jokes about how stupid I was.
It is struggle enough to have a learning disorder, but to have that
struggle compounded by a string of invidious labels—stupid, lazy,
and the like—puts one’s whole self-esteem in jeopardy. The
experience of moral condemnation is so frequent among the learning
disordered as to be commonplace. Indeed, it is only recently that

anything like an informed, compassionate view has developed. Still,
one hears snide jokes all the time in reference to this population:
they are “intellectually challenged,” or they are just looking for an
excuse to get better grades in school or file a discrimination
grievance at work.
It is worth mentioning here the moral bias in our society that often
prevents the diagnosis of ADD—and other learning disorders—from
being made. A streak of Puritanism runs deep within American
society. Permissive and pioneering as we may be on the one hand, we
are strict and conservative on the other. As much as we may be a
country of mavericks and entrepreneurs, we are also a country of
finger waggers and name callers. As much as we may be a country of
compassion for the underdog, we are also a country that believes in
self-reliance.
This is apparent in the field of learning disorders. In our
educational system, despite reform, the operative principle is still
sink or swim. School is a fair marketplace, we seem to believe. The
smart will excel. If you don’t excel, well, then you are not smart.
Pretty words to the contrary, most students, parents, and teachers
still seem to agree on the concept of smart/stupid. They seem to
think that the idea that intelligence may be a more complicated

sink or swim. School is a fair marketplace, we seem to believe. The
smart will excel. If you don’t excel, well, then you are not smart.
Pretty words to the contrary, most students, parents, and teachers
still seem to agree on the concept of smart/stupid. They seem to
think that the idea that intelligence may be a more complicated
matter than smart versus stupid is just a fancy way of dancing
around the truth: you either have it or you don’t.
Such thinking can turn school into one long, dismal ordeal.
We now have the knowledge to identify children with learning
disorders early on and thus spare them the emotional trauma of daily
being misunderstood, daily being labeled dumb, daily not getting it,
and daily wondering why.
Think for a moment of the importance of the innocent curiosity a
child brings to school. Think of the little tendrils of knowledge and of
self-esteem embedded in that curiosity. If nourished, those tendrils

will grow, over the many years the child will spend in school, college,
and beyond, into a solid store of knowledge, a feeling of confidence
around learning new ideas, and a buoyant sense of self. Think of the
look on the face of a three-year-old as she tries to blow bubbles, or
the face of a four-year-old trying to make a house of cards, or a fiveyear-old balancing on his first bicycle. Think of the look of
concentration on that face and think of how important it is to the
child to get it right. Remember in your own life, when you were a
child, the feeling of excitement and danger as you tried something
new. Remember how the one thing you feared more than anything
else was not failure but being made fun of, being humiliated. Think
of the faces of children everywhere as they open their minds to learn.
Keep those faces in mind, the little girls and boys in the early
grades, all trusting the adults to show them the way, all eager and
excited about life and what will come next, and then just follow those
faces over time. Follow the face of a little girl who doesn’t read very
well and is told to try harder; who tends to daydream and is told she
better pay attention; who talks out in class when she sees something
fascinating, like a butterfly on the windowpane, and is told to leave
the class and report to the principal; who forgets her homework and
is told she will just never learn, will she; who writes a story rich in
imagination and insight and is told her handwriting and spelling are
atrocious; who asks for help and is told she should try harder herself
before getting others to do her work for her; who begins to feel
unhappy in school and is told that big girls try harder. This is the
brutal process of the breaking of the spirit of a child. I can think of no
more precious natural resource than the spirits of our children. Life
necessarily breaks us all down somewhat, but to do it unnecessarily
to our children in the name of educating them—this is a tragedy. To
take the joy of learning—which one can see in any child
experimenting with something new—to take that joy and turn it into
fear—that is something we should never do.
And yet it happens every day with children with learning
problems. We can prevent it by applying the knowledge we have in

to our children in the name of educating them—this is a tragedy. To
take the joy of learning—which one can see in any child
experimenting with something new—to take that joy and turn it into
fear—that is something we should never do.
And yet it happens every day with children with learning
problems. We can prevent it by applying the knowledge we have in

defining the learning style of each individual child.
In my work with adults with ADD I hear many stories of school
days gone wrong. People tell these stories much in the same manner
as victims of trauma. There is a numb period when I hear all the
facts. Not much emotion, just a long narrative of what it was like to
be in school. Gradually, as I empathize with what it must have been
like for them, the emotion begins to emerge: the hurt, the anger, the
disappointment, the fear.
“You just don’t know how much I hated going to school,” Franny, a
woman in her thirties, said to me. “It was all a blur. My main idea
was just to get through the day without getting hurt. I always said ‘I
don’t know’ rather than risk giving a wrong answer. I actually loved
to read and to make up stories, but all the teachers saw was the slow
reader, the late papers, the messy handwriting, the bad spelling. One
teacher actually said to me, ‘Your handwriting looks like a moron’s.’
She wasn’t even a mean teacher. She just thought she was motivating
me to try harder. But a ten-year-old doesn’t hear things that way. I
began to think I was a kind of moron: one that liked to read and
make up stories, but could never do anything with them because she
couldn’t write or spell. I really thought I was defective. My whole
self-image became one of being different. I became afraid of making
friends. Each year I’d have one or two sort-of friends. The other most
marginal kids in the class. We became friends by default. One year
we actually called ourselves the rejects, you know, pronounced reejex.”
It turned out that Franny had both dyslexia as well as ADD. Her
treatment was complicated by the damage school had done to her
self-esteem. However, she ended up doing well, starting her own
business as a remedial tutor specializing in women with learning
disorders.
If there is any question of an associated learning disorder or
learning disability in the presence of ADD, neuropsychological

testing can help elucidate exactly what the obstacle to learning is.
The more specific the definition of the problem, the better targeted
the therapy can be. Testing can address such questions as: Is there a
specific math disability or is there only ADD? At what level is this
individual reading? What are the relative cognitive strengths and
weaknesses in the individual’s profile?
The tests are part of what is called a neuropsychological battery.
These are mostly paper-and-pencil tests. Some are like the readingcomprehension tests we all took in grade school. Others are like
games. The subject is asked to put together parts of a maze or is
asked to trace a geometric figure from memory. Others ask the
subject to make up a story based on a picture or a series of
statements, while others ask him to solve math problems. All in all, if
the tests are done by a sensitive examiner, they are not unenjoyable,
and sometimes they are quite fun. Usually, they are most revealing.
Included in the battery are tests of attention, tests of memory, tests
of observational acuity, tests of auditory comprehension, tests of

statements, while others ask him to solve math problems. All in all, if
the tests are done by a sensitive examiner, they are not unenjoyable,
and sometimes they are quite fun. Usually, they are most revealing.
Included in the battery are tests of attention, tests of memory, tests
of observational acuity, tests of auditory comprehension, tests of
spatial relations, tests of word retrieval, tests of vocabulary, tests of
computational ability, tests of general knowledge, and tests of
impulsivity. Sometimes tests of vision and hearing are included in
the battery, and sometimes there is a neurological examination as
well.
People with both dyslexia and ADD are often the most creative and
intuitive of the ADD population. With proper diagnosis and
treatment they can do very well.

ADD with Agitation or Mania
Sometimes ADD can look like manic-depressive illness due to the
high energy level involved in both syndromes. Manic-depressive
illness is characterized by periodic momentous mood swings, from
very high to very low. The very high moods, called periods of mania,
can resemble ADD in that they include highly active behavior, easy
distractibility, impulsivity, and an apparent disregard for personal
safety.
One can distinguish mania from the high energy of ADD by the
level of intensity. An average person could simulate the energized
state of ADD, but could not voluntarily reproduce the energy level of
mania. Mania is the most extreme form of non-drug-induced
drivenness that we know. The manic person can go without sleep for
days, traveling the globe or spending his life’s savings on wild
schemes or making grandiose claims of self-importance or talking
nonstop from morning until night.
The manic individual is truly out of control. He cannot slow down.
He does not just talk fast, he talks as if the words were being
propelled from his mouth, a disconcerting symptom referred to as
“pressured speech.” Listening to someone who is in the grip of mania
gives one the feeling of wanting to duck; the words seem to be
thrown at you. A manic’s mind leaps from topic to topic, like a frog
jumping lily pads, alighting for a moment here only to spring away to
another place. This symptom is aptly called “flight of ideas.” It makes
logical conversation of any length just about impossible. Let me give
an example, taken from my days working on a psychiatric inpatient
unit:
“Good morning, Mr. Jones.”
“Why good morning, Doctor, and good morning to all the lovely
little squiggles you have on your tie, and to squiggles everywhere,
who, by the way, are outward representations of chaos, a soon-tobe-quantified branch of physics and mathematics, which, if you

haven’t boned up on your integrals, will leave you without much
hope of doing more than passing over the topic, as the cow passes
over the moon in the ditty which you may have heard when you
were a child. You were once a child, Doctor? It is safe to assume
that we all were children once, that is a safe assumption, the first
three letters of which are a-s-s so don’t be an ass and assume
anything, as my old teacher used to say. Sound advice, especially
for a planetary stargazer, wouldn’t you say? There is more in the
stars than there is in every brain put together, like link sausages,
a delicious breakfast at that!”
While the individual with ADD can branch from topic to topic, he
does not do so with the suddenness or pressuredness that the manic

anything, as my old teacher used to say. Sound advice, especially
for a planetary stargazer, wouldn’t you say? There is more in the
stars than there is in every brain put together, like link sausages,
a delicious breakfast at that!”
While the individual with ADD can branch from topic to topic, he
does not do so with the suddenness or pressuredness that the manic
does, as in the example above. And while the person with ADD may
be restless and full of energy, he is not driven by nearly the same
horsepower as the manic.
The two syndromes can actually coexist. The person with ADD
may become manic for a period of time, and may cycle into
depression as well.
On the other hand, the person who has ADD with a high degree of
agitation may be incorrectly diagnosed as having manic-depressive
illness. This has practical significance in that the drug most
commonly used to treat mania, lithium, usually does not help ADD.
Indeed, it may make ADD worse. Therefore, it is important to
consider ADD as a possible diagnosis in the agitated individual
thought to be manic but who is nonresponsive to lithium. That
person may have ADD and may get better when treated with one of
the medications used for ADD.
Let me give an example. A forty-three-year-old man—we’ll call him
James—came for an evaluation for adult ADD. He had carried the
diagnosis of manic-depressive illness—or in the formal nosology,
bipolar disorder—for twelve years. As medication, he was taking

1,800 mg of lithium per day, a very large dose. He told me the dose
had been gradually increased since he started taking lithium twelve
years ago. He seemed to remain in a constant state of distraction. He
didn’t think the lithium had helped him much, but he was afraid to
stop it.
His history was indeed remarkable, particularly his job history.
During the year before the diagnosis of bipolar disorder was made,
he had held no less than 124 jobs, actual jobs with W-2 forms to
prove it. The pattern of getting fired and getting hired in such rapid
succession was what had led to his being diagnosed manic. The
reasons for his job endings were suggestive of mania. He would get
fired because he would go into a loquacious tirade about the evils of
the world in the midst of the working day. He would get fired
because he would insult his boss, believing his solutions to problems
were smarter. Or he would quit because of grandiose ideas of better
jobs. Or he would leave to pursue some wild scheme, such as the
time he got hoodwinked by a hustler in the mail-order business who
promised him riches. Or he would get fired because he was too
“hyper” to get along with coworkers.
A very bright man, with a tested IQ of 144, he was currently
working as a night watchman from midnight to 8 A.M. and taking
college classes in the evening. He’d held this job longer than he’d
held any job, seventeen months, probably because there was no one
around to tell him what to do or for him to insult or get carried away
with. His classes were not going well, however; he was barely
passing, because of an inability to pay attention.
It seemed to me that James’s history was compatible with ADD as
well as with manic-depressive illness. Since the lithium did not
appear to be controlling his symptoms, and because other secondtier medications for mania, such as Tegretol, had been tried without
success, we decided to give Ritalin a trial. While tapering his lithium

It seemed to me that James’s history was compatible with ADD as
well as with manic-depressive illness. Since the lithium did not
appear to be controlling his symptoms, and because other secondtier medications for mania, such as Tegretol, had been tried without
success, we decided to give Ritalin a trial. While tapering his lithium
gradually, so we could watch for any emergent symptoms of mania,
James started taking the Ritalin.

The results were dramatic. James felt much more alert, focused,
and, as he put it, “alive,” on the new medication. His grades at night
school soared, averaging around 95. His wife couldn’t believe the
difference. “He’s a totally new man. I always knew he was smart, it’s
just that now he can use it.”
Over six weeks he stopped taking lithium completely. No mania
emerged. He continued to do well.

ADD with Substance Abuse
Of the many masks that ADD wears, substance abuse is one of the
most difficult to see behind because the substance abuse itself causes
such problems. When someone is alcoholic, is abusing cocaine, or is
dependent upon marijuana, we often become so preoccupied with
the problems the drug use creates that we fail to consider what
purpose the drug must be serving for the user. ADD is one of the
underlying causes of substance abuse that is particularly important
to look for, because it can be treated.
There are a host of reasons people drink, or use cocaine, or smoke
dope. To find a moment’s pleasure, to flee pain, to fit in, to relax, are
common reasons for using drugs. When the use becomes abuse, then
it can become an illness in itself. It is widely accepted now that
alcoholism is a disease, with its own genetics, natural history,
treatment, and prognosis. Whether it is “the pain of being a man,” to
use Samuel Johnson’s phrase, that leads people to drink, or drink
that creates the alcoholic’s pain is still an open debate. However, it
may be that alcoholism is its own cause, without any other factor
underlying it.
But perhaps more subtle than the disease concept of alcoholism,
and of substance abuse in general, is the self-medication hypothesis
advanced by Edward Khantzian, a psychoanalyst as well as a
specialist in the field of substance abuse. He proposes the idea that
people use drugs to treat some underlying bad feeling. They use the
drug, whether it be alcohol, cocaine, tobacco, marijuana, or
whatever, as a kind of self-prescribed medication for what ails them
emotionally. The drug then creates physical and emotional problems
of its own, so that repeated use of the drug becomes an attempt to
treat the drug’s own side effects, as in having a drink to cure a
hangover. But the abuse begins in an attempt to cure some bad
feeling. One may use alcohol, for example, to treat depression, or use
marijuana to alleviate feelings of low self-esteem.

of its own, so that repeated use of the drug becomes an attempt to
treat the drug’s own side effects, as in having a drink to cure a
hangover. But the abuse begins in an attempt to cure some bad
feeling. One may use alcohol, for example, to treat depression, or use
marijuana to alleviate feelings of low self-esteem.

This concept is especially useful in understanding the relationship
between ADD and substance abuse. Many people who have
undiagnosed ADD feel bad and don’t know why. Some feel
depressed, as we have mentioned above. Some feel agitated or
anxious. Many more feel distracted and unfocused, living in a sort of
disjointed limbo, waiting to come in for a landing. This feeling of
unease or what psychiatrists call “dysphoria,” doesn’t have a context
or even a name. It’s just life, in the minds of the people who feel it.
You can live with something all your life but not be aware of it in its
own right; it is simply a part of you. So it is with many of our feelings.
Until we name them, they are entwined in our sense of self. Naming
the feelings gives us some leverage over them. Being able to say “I am
sad” can make the sadness less disabling. Once we recognize a
feeling, we can attempt to control or change it. On the other hand,
people who cannot say “I am sad” or “I am angry” are often directed
or overpowered by these emotions in ways they are quite oblivious
to.
So, too, for the dysphoria associated with ADD. It is a peculiar kind
of feeling, the distractibility-within-self many ADD people feel. The
feeling, unrecognized and untreated, often leads to substance abuse
through attempts at self-medication.
Take cocaine as an example. Cocaine is in the class of drugs we call
stimulants. Ritalin, one of the standard prescription medications for
the treatment of ADD, is also a stimulant. Most people feel a rush of
unfocused energy when they take cocaine. However, people with
ADD feel focused when they use cocaine, just as they do when they
take Ritalin. Rather than getting high, they suddenly feel clearheaded
and able to pay attention. When those who don’t know they have
ADD stumble upon cocaine, the drug seems like a cure in that it
temporarily alleviates their ADD symptoms, and so they become
chronic users. Interestingly enough, in the literature about cocaine,
approximately 15 percent of addicts report feeling focused by the
cocaine, rather than feeling high. This 15 percent probably have adult
ADD and are self-medicating, albeit unwittingly, with cocaine.

While cocaine, among the drugs of potential abuse, offers the most
specific treatment for the dysphoria associated with ADD, both
alcohol and marijuana can be used as well. Alcohol tends to quiet the
internal noise many adults with ADD complain of. It also reduces, in
the short term, the anxiety commonly associated with ADD.
Unfortunately, in the long run, alcohol is a depressant, and the daily
withdrawal or hangover associated with chronic abuse increases
anxiety. Similarly, marijuana tends to quiet the noise inside, to help
the individual, in the words of one of my patients, “chill out.”
Unfortunately, this is also only a short-term effect, and the repeated
use of marijuana as an antianxiety agent is associated with a
decrease in motivation.
For those addicts who do in fact have ADD, it is essential that the
ADD be treated as well as the addiction. By treating the ADD one
reduces the likelihood that the individual will go back to abusing the

Unfortunately, this is also only a short-term effect, and the repeated
use of marijuana as an antianxiety agent is associated with a
decrease in motivation.
For those addicts who do in fact have ADD, it is essential that the
ADD be treated as well as the addiction. By treating the ADD one
reduces the likelihood that the individual will go back to abusing the
original drug.
As an example, let me discuss the case of a twenty-three-year-old
man I will call Peter. Peter came to me after being released from jail,
where he’d spent six months for dealing marijuana. Prior to his
arrest, he had developed such a severe marijuana-abuse problem
that his whole life centered around the drug. While in jail he read an
article about ADD and sent it to his mother. In piecing together his
childhood history, both from school and home, she decided it was
quite likely he had ADD. However, after Peter was released from
prison, he found himself in a bind familiar to many people who have
been prosecuted for drug abuse. These people come up against a
great deal of prejudice and fear, if not contempt, from the medical
community. Most doctors do not welcome convicted felons into their
practices. While this is understandable, it is also unfortunate. The
very treatment these people are denied is the key to keeping them off
drugs and out of jail. It only takes a few rejections from legitimate
caregivers to send these people back to their self-medicating, drugabusing ways.

Peter was able to convince me of his sincerity in seeking help, and
I took him on as a patient. I reviewed the school records his mother
gave me, and I listened to both Peter’s and his mother’s account of
his childhood. It was classic for ADD. In fact, one pediatrician had
made the diagnosis of hyperactivity, but there had been insufficient
follow-up. Peter’s academic performance declined through high
school. Even though he was very bright—an IQ of 126, which due to
ADD probably measured lower than it actually was—he could not do
satisfactory work in high school, and he dropped out.
One problem led to another, and this handsome, smart, middleclass boy ended up in jail. After his release from jail he began to turn
his life around on his own. Angry, cynical, and bitter on the one
hand, he was also full of determination: to stay off drugs, to get an
education, to make up for lost time.
The treatment for his ADD provided a key he’d been looking for.
“Now I don’t even want to smoke dope anymore,” he said. “It’s like
the medication takes away the urge.” He got a job and began
attending night school as well. He set high goals for himself and got
the highest grades in his class. His job reports were outstanding. His
girlfriend, who had stood by him even through his days in jail, said
she felt confident now that things would work out. But the most
dramatic report on the effectiveness of the treatment came from
Peter’s mother, who wrote me a letter that I excerpt here:
Dear Dr. Hallowell,
The last time your eyes passed over this handwriting, I was a
mother filled with desperate hope. Peter was home this weekend
for the first time since he has been on medication. It is really
almost impossible to put the words down on paper that fill my
heart.
The Peter that came home this weekend was the Peter who I
always knew he was and wished he would let himself be. This was

mother filled with desperate hope. Peter was home this weekend
for the first time since he has been on medication. It is really
almost impossible to put the words down on paper that fill my
heart.
The Peter that came home this weekend was the Peter who I
always knew he was and wished he would let himself be. This was

the first time in his life he actually sat down in a chair and carried
on a conversation with his father and me.
My heart would always pound in my chest when he and his
father would ever try to do anything together, or even simply talk.
It would be like a time bomb ticking and you knew it would go off.
I watched them talk, laugh, load a van together (they could never
even do that without disagreement). His father’s reaction was,
what a pleasure to have Peter home.
My reaction cannot be done justice in writing. He and I talked
the whole time he was here—until 3 A.M. Sunday morning. There
is this strange feeling I seem to have always had through all of the
years, the nightmare times included. Maybe it is just a mother
wanting that certain image, but I really have been, I feel, not your
June Cleaver type. Under the rough edges, the long hair, Grateful
Dead, the period from “hell,” I see and always have seen
something very special in Peter, and now it is coming to the
surface. Maybe it is something as simple as seeing him with
Lorraine [his girlfriend], their laughter, their caring for each
other, hearing plans for the future, of him heading for a field
where I know his talent would be utilized.
To see your son you love heading on a collision course, involved
with the wrong people, drugs, negative self-esteem, clashes with
the system, prison, the heartbreak—any parent finds it hard to
continue to keep putting one foot in front of the other, to keep
their life going, but they have to.
Then, how does it happen? This young man, my son, finds an
article in a woman’s magazine of all unlikely places, talks to his
mother about it, and sends the article which leads to the
knowledge that changes a life.…
The young man that came home this weekend, the peace and
love that was felt by both of those parents who couldn’t give up,

who refused to write this child off, who were given the strength to
persevere …
It’s been a year now since I met Peter. He has remained drug-free.
He is doing well.

ADD in the Creative Person
While creativity is commonly found in people who have ADD, we
discuss it here as a separate subtype in order to highlight some of the
issues involved in ADD and creativity.
A full definition of creativity and its psychological and neurological
roots is well beyond the scope of this book. For our purposes we
define creativity as a tendency to see life’s elements in new ways, a
tendency to combine bits of personal experience into new forms, a
tendency to give shape to new ideas.
Several elements of the ADD mind favor creativity. First of all,
people with ADD have a greater tolerance of chaos than most. Living
in distraction as they do, bombarded by stimuli from every direction
and unable to screen out what is extraneous, people with ADD live
with chaos all the time. They are used to it, they expect it. For all the
problems this might pose, it can assist the creative process. In order
to rearrange life, in order to create, one must get comfortable with
disarrangement for a while. One must be able to live with the
unfamiliar without, to use Keats’s phrase, any “irritable searching

with chaos all the time. They are used to it, they expect it. For all the
problems this might pose, it can assist the creative process. In order
to rearrange life, in order to create, one must get comfortable with
disarrangement for a while. One must be able to live with the
unfamiliar without, to use Keats’s phrase, any “irritable searching
after fact and reason.” In bearing with the tension of the unknown or
the unfamiliar, one can enable something new to come into
existence. If one forecloses a thought too quickly, because it seems
too weird or strange or disorganized, then the pattern or beauty that
may be hidden within the fantasy will get lost.
When someone with ADD receives a stimulus of some sort—an
image, a sentence, an idea, a person’s face, a question—he does not
immediately put it in its “proper” place. He doesn’t even know where
that place is. So, for example, the water bill gets filed with concerns
over a fishing trip, and the next thing you know an idea is being
generated that has to do with entrepreneurial fishing expeditions.
The very uncertainty with which people with ADD react to most
stimuli allows for these messages to metamorphose before they
solidify in the mind. This tendency to get confused or to confuse

things—so often regarded as a chief bedevilment of the ADD brain—
can enhance creativity most advantageously.
Second, one of the cardinal symptoms of ADD is impulsivity. What
is creativity but impulsivity gone right? One does not plan to have a
creative thought. Creative thoughts happen unscheduled. That is to
say they are impulsive, the result of an impulse, not a planned course
of action. One can set up conditions that maximize the chances of a
creative moment occurring, chance favoring the prepared mind, but
the actual idea, or phrase, or image comes, as it were, out of
nowhere. Nowhere is where many ADD people live all the time.
Neither here nor there nor anywhere in particular, but rather here
and there, not in any one place, but all over the place, nowhere
precisely. And it is out of nowhere, on the wings of impulse, that
creativity flies in.
A third element that favors creativity among people with ADD is
an often-overlooked capacity they have. This is the ability to
intensely focus or hyperfocus at times. As mentioned earlier, the
term “attention deficit” is a misnomer. It is a matter of attention
inconsistency. While it is true that the ADD mind wanders when not
engaged, it is also the case that the ADD mind fastens on to its
subject fiercely when it is engaged. A child with ADD may sit for
hours meticulously putting together a model airplane. An adult may
work with amazing concentration when faced with a deadline. Or an
adult with ADD may become obsessed with a project and complete it
in a tenth of the time one would have predicted. This ability to
hyperfocus heats up the furnace in the brain, so to speak, and melts
down rigid elements so they may easily flow and commingle,
allowing for new products to be formed once they hit the cool light of
day. The intensity of the furnace when it heats up may help explain
why it needs to cool down, to be distracted, when it is not heated up.
A fourth element contributing to creativity is what Russell Barkley
has called the “hyperreactivity” of the ADD mind. Cousin to the
traditional symptom of hyperactivity, hyperreactivity is more

day. The intensity of the furnace when it heats up may help explain
why it needs to cool down, to be distracted, when it is not heated up.
A fourth element contributing to creativity is what Russell Barkley
has called the “hyperreactivity” of the ADD mind. Cousin to the
traditional symptom of hyperactivity, hyperreactivity is more

common among people with ADD than hyperactivity is. People with
ADD are always reacting. Even when they look calm and sedate, they
are usually churning inside, taking this piece of data and moving it
there, pushing this thought through their emotional network, putting
that idea on the fire to burn, exploding or subsiding, but always in
motion. Such hyperreactivity enhances creativity because it increases
the number of collisions in the brain. Each collision has the potential
to emit new light, new matter, as when subatomic particles collide.
The trick for the person with ADD is to harness these processes
productively. Some people spend a lifetime trying. They burst with
creative energy but like a live wire without a socket to plug into, they
dispel their energy unchanneled. The child may dissipate his or her
creativity just in making wise remarks in class, or the adult may have
a long list of marvelous ideas but have no plan for enacting them. In
the chapter on treatment we will discuss ways of marshaling this
energy constructively.

ADD with High-Risk Behavior, or “High-Stim” ADD
“What is my ideal fantasy?” said one adult with ADD. “To live my day
in a room with three TVs going, me holding the blipper, my PC
running, the fax operating, a CD playing, portable phone held to one
ear, the newspaper spread out before me, with three deals about to
close.”
Such a search for highly stimulating situations is often a central
part of the syndrome of ADD in adults and in children.
Some children with ADD always seek action. The roots of highstimulation-seeking adult behavior can be seen in those children who
are hyperactive (but not in the dreamy, nonhyperactive kids). The
hyperactive child with ADD craves novelty and needs excitement. He
tends to like life to be lively and fast-paced. If there is no conflict
present, nothing to spice the scene up, he might create some. For
example, the child might pick a fight with a sibling, not because he is
angry but because he is bored. Or he might disrupt a quiet evening at
home, not because he is upset but because he feels understimulated.
Or he might make a clown of himself in class not because he is
particularly witty or in need of attention but because he finds the
class dull. The excitement and danger of causing an uproar in the
classroom can far surpass any reward for being a “good” student. It is
important that the parent or teacher understand this. Taking the
behavior too seriously, letting the child get a big rise out of you, can
backfire. The excitement of a strong reaction may be just what the
child wants.
So it can be with the adult with ADD who seeks intense
stimulation, often through high-risk behavior. While most people
with ADD are easily bored and seek diversion quickly, the adult with
high-stim ADD particularly abhors boredom. He—and it is usually a
he—may seek high stimulation through relatively safe avenues—
creating tight deadlines to work under; regularly engaging in heavy
exercise; keeping many projects going simultaneously; carrying
games or crossword puzzles around in case a moment of tedium

high-stim ADD particularly abhors boredom. He—and it is usually a
he—may seek high stimulation through relatively safe avenues—
creating tight deadlines to work under; regularly engaging in heavy
exercise; keeping many projects going simultaneously; carrying
games or crossword puzzles around in case a moment of tedium

arises; taking on very challenging work; living on the brink of chaos
by not tending to checkbooks, appointment books, and the like;
provoking testy conversations for the fun of it—or through more
risky means, such as gambling, having dangerous romantic liaisons,
making very risky business deals, putting himself in physical danger
through such activities as vertical skiing (an extraordinarily
dangerous and exhilarating kind of skiing that entails going straight
down an almost sheer face of ice), bungee-jumping, car racing, or
other high-risk activities of his own creation. A calm place or relaxing
scene can stress such an ADD adult to the point of exhaustion.
However, that same person paradoxically may find calm and
relaxation in hubbubs of activity or in risky, even very dangerous
situations.
Brian Jones, a thirty-seven-year-old insurance executive, is a good
example. He shows up at the office at 6:30 A.M. after running six
miles and spending twenty minutes on his Stairmaster. He is not a
fitness freak; it’s just that without his morning workout he feels as if
he would explode within the confines of the workday. As it is, his
company uses him as a kind of human time bomb, strategically
placing him in meetings that need an explosive element or with
clients who won’t get off the dime. Behind his back the junior
employees call him “Boom-Boom” because of his legendary
eruptions. He’s always on the brink of getting fired or of being
promoted.
On weekends Brian goes on the prowl in search of action. He has
tried vertical skiing, which he loves. He has raced Formula One cars.
He skydives regularly. Sometimes he’ll just drive around town
playing chicken with traffic lights, speeding through stop signs,
taking safaris down one-way streets, anything to combat what he
calls “the endless redundancy of everyday life.” He loves to gamble,
and he’s been pretty lucky. However, of late, he’s taken to making
blind five-hundred-dollar bets at the racetrack: he puts down his
wager without even looking at the racing form, picking a horse with

nothing but whimsy to guide him. He came for a consultation after
losing four of these bets consecutively.
“It’s not the losing per se that bothers me,” he said. “What bothers
me is how much I like the action. I mean, Doc, I don’t just like it. I
love it. I want to go back and make a hundred-thousand-dollar bet
blind. Now that much could get me into big financial trouble fast. But
I want to do it. I imagine it’s like someone who’s having an affair
with someone they know they shouldn’t, but they just can’t hold
back, it’s got such a grip on them. I’ve finally found something that
gets my attention. It gets my juices flowing like nothing else, but in a
strange way it also calms me and relaxes me. All the other
distractions of my life, the little mosquitoes that are buzzing around
my brain trying to bite me, they all go away when I’m at the track. I
mean, after I put that bet down, I’m there. I’m alive. I can see and
hear. After that, everything else seems dull. I have to really hammer
myself in the morning to get myself to work now.”

distractions of my life, the little mosquitoes that are buzzing around
my brain trying to bite me, they all go away when I’m at the track. I
mean, after I put that bet down, I’m there. I’m alive. I can see and
hear. After that, everything else seems dull. I have to really hammer
myself in the morning to get myself to work now.”
Brian had adult ADD. He responded well to treatment, which
included medication and psychotherapy. The medication helped him
focus, thus reducing his appetite for high stimulation, which he had
been using as a focusing device. The psychotherapy helped him
identify and stay with his feelings a bit, rather than having to blast
past them. One of the reasons people like Brian seek high stimulation
is that they cannot bear the tension of an ordinary feeling for very
long. If they feel sad or lonely or afraid or above all bored, they swing
into fast action for relief. Once medication helped him focus, Brian
used psychotherapy to learn to stay with an emotion. He began to
find that his emotions could be stimulating in their own right, and in
a safe and useful way.
He has given up gambling and is working on ways of modulating
his appetite for high stimulation so that he can enjoy the pleasures of
ordinary life. He has not become a boring person, which was his fear,
but his means of sustaining interest in life have changed.

Problem gambling is a common disorder in this country, afflicting
some 3-to-5 million people. We do not yet have any reliable figures
as to what percent of problem gamblers have ADD, but a rough
estimate would be 15 to 20 percent. A corollary to problem gambling,
which is also associated with high-stim ADD, is chronic
overspending. Just as lotteries have brought ease and convenience to
gambling, so have credit cards made overspending insidiously easy.
The overspender is often relieving some bland ennui with the
excitement of a blitz through the shopping mall. For both the
gambler and the overspender, treatment can avert financial disaster.
Any of the following might be a tip-off for high-stimulation adult
ADD:
Chronic, high-risk behaviors of any sort
Type A personality
Thrill-seeking personality
Addictive behaviors
Explosive temper
Exercise addiction
Irascible impatience
Habitual gambling
Violent behavior
Accident-proneness
Repetitious whirlwind romances
Chronic overspending

Other disorders of impulse control like kleptomania and
pyromania
The essence of this subtype of adult ADD is the hunger for intense
stimulation. Once you understand the tendency and have a name for
it, you can feel it when you are with persons who have it. They
radiate energy and create zones of action wherever they go. It is as if
they carry within them a radioactive element, emitting energy at all
times. They are always trying to strike up the band, go for the gusto,
seize the moment and make it last. They will make deals in the midst
of siestas, turn the vacation house’s back room into a newsroom or a
business center, make banquets out of leftovers, leave conversations
in mid-sentence to go pursue an idea, or bring a brass band to an
after-funeral party. These people can be a lot of fun to be with, and
they can be very trying as well. As with Brian Jones, they can be
productive and successful, but they can also be on the edge of ruin.
They can be the ones who “dare to go where no man has gone
before.” However, they can also be in danger when they go there.

after-funeral party. These people can be a lot of fun to be with, and
they can be very trying as well. As with Brian Jones, they can be
productive and successful, but they can also be on the edge of ruin.
They can be the ones who “dare to go where no man has gone
before.” However, they can also be in danger when they go there.
They may be in need of help.
While we do not understand exactly why the danger or thrill is so
appealing to a certain kind of adult with ADD, we do see the pattern
often. It may be that the thrill or danger helps focus the individual in
a way similar to that of stimulant medication, inducing changes at
the neurotransmitter level. Stimulant medications, the standard
medications for ADD, enhance the release of epinephrine
(adrenaline) in the brain. High-risk behavior does the same thing.
Hence such behavior may constitute a form of self-medication.
In addition, a high-risk situation may supply the extra motivation
that we know can help with focusing. When one is highly motivated,
once again there is a change at the neurotransmitter level that
enhances focusing. Situations of danger can do this particularly. As
Samuel Johnson said, “Depend upon it sir, when a man knows he is
to be hanged in a fortnight, it concentrates his mind wonderfully.”

Whatever may be going on, it is important that we consider ADD
in adults who tend toward thrill-seeking, dangerous risk-taking, or a
chronic inability to relax or have fun in the absence of intense
stimulation. Even those people we simply chalk up to having the
well-known Type A personality may have covert ADD. While
psychological conflict can certainly contribute to such behavior,
psychodynamic therapy alone may miss the biological component.
Without taking into account the biology, the therapy may be
ineffective.

ADD with Dissociative States
Probably the most difficult symptom of ADD to evaluate accurately is
what we call “distractibility.” While we all know, pretty much, what
“distractible” means, it can be very difficult to ascertain exactly what
is causing a person to be distractible. A partial list of causes of
distractibility would include:
ADD
Depression
Anxiety states
Drug use or withdrawal
Stress
Seizure disorder (petit mal)
Caffeinism
Sleep deprivation, fatigue
Dissociative disorders
This list is only partial, but it highlights the importance of accurately
understanding the cause of a symptom before making a diagnosis. It
is the last cause listed above, dissociative disorders, that this section
takes up.
Dissociation refers to the dis-association of a feeling with the cause
of that feeling. A dissociative state is a blank, emotionally neutral
state of mind wherein one is cut off from one’s external situation and
internal feelings. Victims of trauma often dissociate to escape the
pain associated with the memory of the trauma or even during the
trauma itself they dissociate as their only means of defending
themselves against the unendurable. The trauma may be childhood

state of mind wherein one is cut off from one’s external situation and
internal feelings. Victims of trauma often dissociate to escape the
pain associated with the memory of the trauma or even during the
trauma itself they dissociate as their only means of defending
themselves against the unendurable. The trauma may be childhood

abuse of some kind, experiences in combat, or any event that was of
such enormous emotional and/or physical pain as to be psychically
unbearable.
The dissociated state that trauma may produce can closely
resemble the distracted state caused by ADD. In recent years, due to
the excellent work of investigators like Judith Herman and Bessel
Van der Kolk, we have learned a great deal about emotional trauma.
As more and more accounts appear of childhood abuse, we are
finding more and more people who have suffered trauma but have
been unable to speak of it. One of the research questions that has yet
to be answered is how much of an overlap exists between the
population of people who have suffered trauma and developed
dissociative states, and those people with ADD.
In differentiating the dissociative state from distractibility, the first
factor to consider is the individual’s history. Does he or she have a
history of trauma? Of course, many victims of trauma cannot recall
the trauma they suffered. Frequently, an individual, in the midst of
psychotherapy, will gradually remember some awful events that had
been forgotten for years. The safe and protective context of
psychotherapy allows the person to feel secure enough to recapture
the memory and try to work through the pain.
On the other hand, does the individual have a history that reflects
ADD, even if it has not yet been diagnosed? People with a history of
ADD do not forget the events, the evidence, of their ADD; they often
just do not know what it means.
Even if one discovers a history of ADD and no history of trauma,
this is no guarantee that a history of trauma will not emerge as the
therapy moves along. One should always bear in mind that what
looks like distractibility may be confused with a dissociative state.

ADD with Borderline Personality Features
When the diagnosis of borderline personality disorder was first
described in the 1950s, it referred to the “borderline” between
psychosis and neurosis.
Our knowledge of the condition has increased considerably since
the fifties, although the original diagnostic label remains. Now we
understand the syndrome as follows: Individuals with a borderline
personality disorder have a poorly defined inner sense of self. They
hunger after relationships on the one hand, with a pressing urge
almost to merge with the other person, but on the other hand they
abruptly terminate relationships and flee intimacy as soon as it is
established. They are given to periods of deep psychic pain, full of
rage, fear, and depression. They often feel suicidal, and
characteristically make many gestures of suicide during young
adulthood, typically by wrist-cutting or overdosing. Usually, their
suicide attempts do not end in death but rather serve a kind of selfsoothing function. It may seem incongruous to talk of a suicide
attempt as self-soothing, but many people with borderline
personalities speak of a tremendous difficulty in regulating their
feelings. Sometimes a kind of monster of emotion grows inside that
feels as if it will overwhelm the individual utterly. The act of cutting

suicide attempts do not end in death but rather serve a kind of selfsoothing function. It may seem incongruous to talk of a suicide
attempt as self-soothing, but many people with borderline
personalities speak of a tremendous difficulty in regulating their
feelings. Sometimes a kind of monster of emotion grows inside that
feels as if it will overwhelm the individual utterly. The act of cutting
into one’s wrist, physically painful as it might be, cuts into the
monster inside, and as the blood is let, the bad feelings dissipate in a
soothing trickle.
One of the primary feelings of the borderline syndrome is rage,
which can come clawing out unexpectedly and apparently
unprovoked. Borderline individuals are exquisitely sensitive to
rejection. They tend to draw others into their personal drama
magnetically, and they tend to split these people, usually their
caregivers, into the good and the bad. They have difficulty seeing
other people as combinations of both good and bad, and they resolve
this difficulty by idealizing some and totally devaluing others. They
often treat their inner pain with drugs and/or alcohol. This

constellation of extreme symptoms makes their lives chaotic, painful,
unpredictable, and often tragic.
What does this have to do with ADD? If one reviews the symptoms
named above, several points of intersection with ADD can be seen.
The poorly defined inner self of the borderline can closely resemble
the distracted, fragmented self of the person with ADD. The abrupt
breaking off of relationships is not uncommon in ADD when the
individual inadvertently simply tunes out. The person with ADD
seeks high stimulation in order to focus, while the borderline person
seeks high stimulation to deal with painful feelings. Both syndromes
are marked by a high degree of impulsivity. The person with ADD
carries a great deal of anger, due to frequent frustration over not
getting things right, while the person with a borderline syndrome
carries much anger due to frequent frustration over not getting his or
her emotional needs met. In both syndromes substance abuse is not
uncommon as a form of self-medication. These similarities are
summarized in the table below.

We have seen a number of cases in our practice, and have had
reports from others, of patients diagnosed as borderline who in fact
have ADD. The practical significance of this is that the treatment for
ADD is quite different from the treatment for borderline personality
disorder.
As an example, consider the case of Bonnie. As a child, Bonnie was
physically aggressive at home and impulsive and unproductive at
school. By the third grade she was referred to as “a terror” by her
parents and teachers alike and was locked into a power struggle with
her mother that would last for years. She felt extremely resentful of
her mother’s attempts to “force me into the conventional mold,” and
so she rebelled as often as possible. In her teenage years she often
used drugs and spent the night away from home. Visits to various
family and individual therapists throughout adolescence did not
help. Bonnie was attractive, and had a constant entourage of boys

her mother’s attempts to “force me into the conventional mold,” and
so she rebelled as often as possible. In her teenage years she often
used drugs and spent the night away from home. Visits to various
family and individual therapists throughout adolescence did not
help. Bonnie was attractive, and had a constant entourage of boys

throughout high school. She encouraged sexual rumors about herself
in order to worry her mother, who responded by trying,
unsuccessfully, to set limits on her. Although Bonnie had poor
grades, she scored high on the college admission tests, and so went
off to a good university. Bonnie settled down in college, falling in love
with literature. Although she had great trouble completing papers on
time, she did graduate. Soon thereafter she became pregnant and
married a man she liked but did not love.
Her child became the organizing principle in Bonnie’s life, much as
literature had been in college. However, once the child left for school,
Bonnie became obsessed with suicidal fantasies. When the child was
away, Bonnie felt empty. She could not reassure herself that even
though her child was not at home, the child was still connected to
her. Her old insecurities swirled up and began to choke her. To
combat these feelings she started drinking heavily, until finally her
husband had her committed to a detoxification center where she was
diagnosed as a borderline personality.
After two years of therapy she felt no better. She was chronically
depressed and, as she put it, “distracted from having any goals.”
Then, by chance, she happened to read about ADD. After consulting
with her therapist, who quite open-mindedly recommended she
follow up with an evaluation for ADD, Bonnie came to our clinic.
After reviewing her history and some psychological testing, I could
certainly see why the diagnosis of borderline personality had been
made. However, by highlighting other aspects of her history, I could
also see ample grounds for a diagnosis of ADD. Bonnie and her
therapist agreed to a trial of medication for ADD.
The results were dramatic. What Bonnie had perceived as
depression was in retrospect “a state of aimless distractibility.” As
the medication helped her focus, she began to develop goals. She
enrolled in school, and is now a successful participant in a Ph.D.
program in English. Her work with her therapist suddenly became

productive, rather than frustratingly off target. She was able to start
working through many of the problems from her childhood, rather
than avoiding or forgetting them. In addition to the help in focusing
the medication provided, the diagnosis of ADD lifted some of the
guilt and self-recrimination Bonnie had carried while considering
herself borderline.
Unknowingly, in her past, she had been treating her ADD by
finding axes around which to organize herself. First there was the
axis of the struggle with her mother. While this damaged her
psychologically in many ways, it did serve the constructive purpose
of organizing her thoughts and feelings. Then there was the axis of
the study of literature in college, followed by the axis of taking care of
her baby at home. However, when the child left for school, that
relationship no longer filled her day; the organizing axis was gone,
and the forces of distractibility took over and she began to selfmedicate with alcohol.
We do not know how common this picture of ADD with borderline

the study of literature in college, followed by the axis of taking care of
her baby at home. However, when the child left for school, that
relationship no longer filled her day; the organizing axis was gone,
and the forces of distractibility took over and she began to selfmedicate with alcohol.
We do not know how common this picture of ADD with borderline
features really is. As the diagnosis of ADD gains wider attention, it
would not be surprising to see it more frequently. The combination
of sudden anger, the search for high stimulation, impulsivity,
suicidal thoughts or gestures, self-recrimination, underachievement,
and disorganization, which sounds like a borderline personality,
could well be hidden ADD.

ADD with Conduct Disorder or Oppositional Disorder (in Children) or
Antisocial Personality Features (in Adults)
In both children and adults, especially among males, certain kinds of
aggressive or defiant behavior can mask ADD or occur concurrently.
“Conduct disorder” and “oppositional defiant disorder” are two
different diagnoses that apply to particular patterns of aggressive
behavior in children. Although the terms may conjure up all one’s
worst fantasies of some kind of psychiatric enforcement agency,
handing down frumpish norms of good versus “disordered” behavior,
there are children who have great trouble peacefully coexisting with
others in any environment. These children get into frequent fights;
they can’t obey rules; they resist limits; they disrupt the work and
play of others; they may even break the law. While there is a genetic
factor in these disorders we are just learning about, there is also a
significant environmental factor. Often these children come from
severely troubled families, families where the parents may be absent
or uninvolved, where there may be drug use, physical or sexual
abuse, extreme neglect, little food, poor housing, little education, few
supports of any kind. The “disordered” conduct of these children is
often a critical warning sign of the need for intervention and
assistance at home.
The restless, hyperreactive behavior of a child with ADD can
resemble that of a child with conduct or oppositional disorder. One
must look closely to distinguish between the two. They may indeed
coexist. More frequently, however, children with ADD are incorrectly
diagnosed as having a conduct disorder and vice versa. In the
children with just ADD, one will not find the angry edge, or the
premeditation one sees in conduct or oppositional disorders. When
an ADD child trips and falls, he may get flustered. When an
oppositional-disorder child trips and falls, he immediately looks to
blame someone else and plot his revenge at recess. The disruptive
outbursts of the child with ADD tend to be impulsive and
spontaneous, whereas these outbursts in the conduct-disordered
child tend to be planned or in response to some perceived insult or

oppositional-disorder child trips and falls, he immediately looks to
blame someone else and plot his revenge at recess. The disruptive
outbursts of the child with ADD tend to be impulsive and
spontaneous, whereas these outbursts in the conduct-disordered
child tend to be planned or in response to some perceived insult or

injury. The child with conduct disorder alone, on the other hand,
does not show the distractibility or restlessness of the child with
ADD. It can be difficult to get an accurate diagnosis for these
children because everybody—parents, teachers, school officials—
becomes so upset over the “bad” behavior that they don’t attempt to
understand what’s causing it before trying to stamp it out.
A typical example is the child in school who is “bouncing off the
walls.” I’m not sure why that is the phrase used, because usually it is
not walls but other people the child is bouncing off of, but I know I
hear it all the time, and when I do, it is usually in reference to a little
boy, age six to twelve, who, wherever he goes, leaves people shaking
their heads and muttering to themselves. This is the boy who
overturns the table at the birthday party, or upsets the jar of paint in
art class, or pushes over a little girl during recess, or bumps into the
teacher as she’s bending to pick up a piece of chalk. Or worse. This is
the child who uses four-letter words when he’s told to do something,
who has a tantrum in the classroom, breaking windows and chairs,
who falls on the floor kicking and screaming when asked to go to gym
class, who stabs a pencil into his friend’s arm while waiting in line.
In responding to these children, it is important to figure out the
cause of their aggression rather than simply punishing them for the
behavior. Among the many possible causes are conduct or
oppositional disorder or ADD, or a combination.
There is a similar group of adults, usually men, whose behavior
causes such problems that to many people treatment seems
pointless, a liberal-minded luxury. Some of them are in jails, or in
mental hospitals with a diagnosis of antisocial personality. Like the
borderline population and those with disorders of impulse control,
many who are diagnosed as antisocial personalities actually have
ADD.
People with an antisocial personality disorder, those who are
sometimes called sociopathic or psychopathic, are the transgressors

in our world. They break the law, they test the limits, they deceive,
they lie, cheat, and steal. They also can be, often, very likable and
charming.
In the case of adults with antisocial personalities who have a clear
childhood history of ADD rather than oppositional disorder, it may
be the case that the antisocial diagnosis is incorrect, or that while the
antisocial behavior may meet the technical requirements for that
diagnosis, yet the individual still responds favorably to treatments
specific for ADD.
Particularly in males with a history of violent behavior—the kinds
of people that fill jails and mental hospitals—one finds many who
have a classic history of ADD. Their violence is not due to a defect in
their conscience or to psychosis or to some morbid familial conflict,
but to the frustration intolerance and impulsivity of ADD. When they
are properly diagnosed and receive the appropriate treatment, often
their course changes for the better.

have a classic history of ADD. Their violence is not due to a defect in
their conscience or to psychosis or to some morbid familial conflict,
but to the frustration intolerance and impulsivity of ADD. When they
are properly diagnosed and receive the appropriate treatment, often
their course changes for the better.

ADD with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Interestingly enough, much of the best research we have on both
ADD and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) come from the same
person, Dr. Judith Rapoport at the National Institute of Mental
Health in Washington, D.C. Her book on OCD, The Boy Who
Couldn’t Stop Washing, is an excellent example of psychological
thinking made clear.
As Rapoport points out in her book and elsewhere, OCD can occur
with other syndromes, ADD being one of them. The symptoms of
OCD include driven, ritualistic thinking; compulsive, repetitive
behavior; intrusive, unpleasant thoughts; superstitions that control
one’s behavior; and an inability of the “will” to counteract these
symptoms, try as it might. Like ADD, it is a biologically based
disorder.
When OCD occurs with ADD, the ADD may go undetected at first
because the symptoms of OCD are more troublesome. Or if the
disruptive symptoms of ADD predominate, then one may miss the
underlying OCD. Since the treatments for the two syndromes are
different, it is important to diagnose them both when they occur
together.

Pseudo-ADD
In concluding this chapter on the subtypes of ADD, we mention one
subtype that is not ADD at all. It is not really a subtype, but it is
mentioned here because it is directly linked to true ADD. This is the
phenomenon of culturally induced ADD, what we call pseudo-ADD.
American society tends to create ADD-like symptoms in us all. We
live in an ADD-ogenic culture.
What are some of the hallmarks of American culture that are also
typical of ADD? The fast pace. The sound bite. The bottom line. Short
takes, quick cuts. The TV remote-control clicker. High stimulation.
Restlessness. Violence. Anxiety. Ingenuity. Creativity. Speed.
Present-centered, no future, no past. Disorganization. Mavericks. A
mistrust of authority. Video. Going for the gusto. Making it on the
run. The fast track. Whatever works. Hollywood. The stock exchange.
Fads. High stim.
It is important to keep this in mind or you may start thinking that
everybody you know has ADD. The disorder is culturally syntonic—
that is to say, it fits right in.
It is true that the prevalence of ADD—the frequency with which it
occurs in the population over a given period of time—is higher in
America than it is overseas. We do not know why this is so. The
British think that we overdiagnose ADD in America. Until recently,
Michael Rutter, one of the leading British child psychiatrists and an
expert on epidemiology, doubted that ADD, as we think of it, actually
existed as a valid syndrome. He thought we were lumping other
syndromes under the heading of ADD. He has since changed his
mind, acknowledging that ADD does indeed exist, but he finds it in
the British population at lower rates than we diagnose it here.
One possible explanation for this is that our gene pool is heavily
loaded for ADD. The people who founded our country, and
continued to populate it over time, were just the types of people who
might have had ADD. They did not like to sit still. They had to be

the British population at lower rates than we diagnose it here.
One possible explanation for this is that our gene pool is heavily
loaded for ADD. The people who founded our country, and
continued to populate it over time, were just the types of people who
might have had ADD. They did not like to sit still. They had to be

willing to take an enormous risk in boarding a ship and crossing the
ocean, leaving their homes behind; they were action-oriented,
independent, wanting to get away from the old ways and strike out
on their own, ready to lose everything in search of a better life. The
higher prevalence of ADD in our current society may be due to its
higher prevalence among those who settled America.
Certain qualities are often associated with the American
temperament. Our violent, rough-and-tumble society, our bottomline pragmatism, our impatience, our intolerance of class
distinctions, our love of intense stimulation—these qualities, which
are sometimes explained by our youth as a country, may in part arise
from the heavy load of ADD in our gene pool.
Since we suspect that ADD is genetically transmitted, this theory
makes some sense. Although it is impossible to ascertain the
prevalence of ADD in colonial Boston or Philadelphia, as you read
through the lives of the adventurous souls who lived there, you can
see that more than a few of them liked risk and high stimulation,
balked at custom and formality, lived by innovation and invention,
and rose to action rather quickly. It is dangerous to diagnose the
dead, but Benjamin Franklin, for example, seems like a man with a
case of ADD. Creative, impulsive, inventive, attending to many
projects at a time, drawn to high stimulation through wit, politics,
diplomacy, literature, science, and romance, Franklin gives us ample
ground to speculate that he may have had ADD and was the happier
for it.
If it is true that part of the high energy and risk-taking of our
ancestors was due to ADD, then that would explain, to some extent,
why our rates of ADD are higher than other people’s. But even taking
that into account, might we be overdiagnosing it, or might our
definition of it be so broad as to be overinclusive? Frequently, people
remark when they hear a description of ADD for the first time, “But
doesn’t everybody have that?” or, “Isn’t that just a variation on

normal behavior?” or “How can you call it a disorder when it’s so
common?”
It may seem that our cultural norms are growing closer and closer
to the diagnostic criteria for ADD. Many of us, particularly those in
urban areas, live in an ADD-ogenic world, one that demands speed
and splintering of attention to “keep up.” The claims on our attention
and the flow of information we are expected to process are
enormous. The explosion of communications technology and our
standard way of responding to its most ubiquitous form—television—
provide good examples of ADD behavior. Remote-control switch in
hand, we switch from station to station, taking in dozens of programs
at once, catching a line here, an image there, getting the gist of the
show in a millisecond, getting bored with it in a full second, blipping
on to the next show, the next bit of stimulation, the next quick pick.
In addition, now we have the constant buzz from the cyber world to
add to our distraction.
Because we live in a very ADD-oid culture, almost everybody can
identify with the symptoms of ADD. Most people know what it feels

show in a millisecond, getting bored with it in a full second, blipping
on to the next show, the next bit of stimulation, the next quick pick.
In addition, now we have the constant buzz from the cyber world to
add to our distraction.
Because we live in a very ADD-oid culture, almost everybody can
identify with the symptoms of ADD. Most people know what it feels
like to be bombarded with stimuli, to be distracted by overlapping
signals all the time, to have too many obligations and not enough
time to meet them, to be in a chronic hurry, to be late, to tune out
quickly, to get frustrated easily, to find it difficult to slow down and
relax when given the chance, to miss high stimulation when it is
withdrawn, to be hooked to the phone and the fax and the computer
screen and the video, to live life in a whirlwind.
That is not to say, however, that most people have ADD. What they
have is what we call pseudo-ADD. As we will discuss in the chapter
on diagnosis, true ADD is a medical diagnosis requiring evaluation
by an expert. What differentiates pseudo-ADD from true ADD, what
differentiates the people who can only identify with it from those
who actually have it, is a matter of duration and intensity of the
symptoms.

This is true of many psychiatric diagnoses. For example, most of us
know what it feels like to be paranoid. We have all felt, at one time or
another, that someone is out to get us who really isn’t. We have, most
of us, felt suspicious and nervous, wondering: Are they watching me?
Is the IRS out to get me? Is my boss setting me up? Was that joke at
the meeting a veiled reference to me? That we experience moments
of paranoia does not make us paranoid personalities, however. In the
true paranoid personality, the paranoia besets the individual
chronically and intensely. It is the intensity and duration of
symptoms that differentiates the insecure person from the truly
paranoid.
Similarly, we have all been depressed at one time or another. That
does not mean we have suffered major depression. Most of us have
gambled at some time—bought a lottery ticket or put a nickel in a slot
machine—and felt a thrill when we won. That does not make us
pathological gamblers. Most people have felt a fear of heights at
times, or had trouble with closed spaces, or felt frightened of snakes,
but not to the extent of developing a phobia. Only if the symptoms
are more intense than is normal, if they last a long while, and if they
interfere with one’s everyday life, only then can one entertain an
actual diagnosis.
So it is with ADD. The person with true ADD experiences the
symptoms most of the time and experiences them more intensely
than the average person. Most important, the symptoms tend to
interfere with everyday life more than for the average person.
It is important to keep true ADD separate from pseudo-ADD for
the diagnosis to retain any serious meaning. If everybody who gets
distracted or feels hurried or gets easily bored is diagnosed with
ADD, then the diagnosis will signify nothing more than a passing fad.
While pseudo-ADD may be interesting as a kind of metaphor for
American culture, the true syndrome is no metaphor. It is a real, and
sometimes crippling, biologically based condition that requires
careful diagnosis and equally careful treatment.

HOW DO I KNOW IF I HAVE IT?

THE STEPS TOWARD DIAGNOSIS
It is arbitrary, really, where the line of diagnosis is drawn, where
“normal” leaves off and ADD begins. And yet, as Edmund Burke
remarked in differentiating night from day, “though there be not a
clear line between them, yet no one would deny that there is a
difference.”
There is a logical set of steps that lead to a diagnosis of ADD. The
key to it is the history, one’s own recollection of one’s life, confirmed
and amplified (particularly in diagnosing ADD in a child) by the
observations of those close to one: parents, spouse, teacher, sibling,
friend. There is no definitive test for ADD, no blood test or
electroencephalogram reading, or CAT scan or PET scan or X-ray, no
pathognomonic neurological finding or psychological testing score.
It is important to underline this point: the diagnosis of ADD is
based first and foremost on the individual’s history or life story. The
most important step in determining whether one has ADD is sitting
down and talking to somebody who is knowledgeable in the field.
The most important “test” in making the diagnosis of ADD is the
taking of the individual’s history. This is old-fashioned medicine, not
high-tech. This is a doctor talking to a patient, asking questions,
listening to answers, drawing conclusions based upon getting to
know the patient well. These days we often don’t respect or trust
anything medical that doesn’t depend upon fancy technology. Yet the
diagnosis of ADD depends absolutely upon the simplest of all
medical procedures: the taking of a history. This is the most powerful
(and, ironically, the least expensive) tool we have in making a
diagnosis. Your doctor should be sure to trust it and use it before
ordering complex, expensive, and sometimes unnecessary tests.
The logical steps toward diagnosis proceed as follows:

1. You Seek Help
Something happens to lead you to look for help. In children this is
usually academic underachievement or disruptive behavior. In adults
the inability to “get one’s act together,” chronic disorganization or
procrastination, underachievement professionally, trouble staying
close in a relationship, chronic anxiety or depression, substance
abuse, gambling, or chronic distractibility are the leading reasons
one seeks help. Most adults who have ADD do not suspect they have
it. They just feel that something is amiss in some unnameable way.
Many are being treated for some condition other than ADD, the ADD
lying masked and undetected.

2. Review Your History
The first step in the diagnostic process is for you to find a physician
knowledgeable in the field of ADD and to sit down with him or her
and go over your life story. If after reviewing your history your
physician decides (1) that you have the symptoms of ADD, (2) you
have had them since childhood, (3) you have the symptoms to a
much greater degree than your peers of the same mental age, and (4)
there is no other diagnosis that can explain your symptoms, then a
presumptive diagnosis of ADD can be made.
You should keep in mind a few points concerning your history.
First of all, it is best if at least two people relate the history. People
with ADD are notoriously poor self-observers. The history will be
much more reliable if another person is present to corroborate,
enlarge upon, or give a different point of view on what you say. In the
case of children, the history should be taken from the child, from

First of all, it is best if at least two people relate the history. People
with ADD are notoriously poor self-observers. The history will be
much more reliable if another person is present to corroborate,
enlarge upon, or give a different point of view on what you say. In the
case of children, the history should be taken from the child, from
parents, and from schoolteachers’ written or telephoned reports.
With adults, the history should be taken from the individual in
question as well as his or her spouse, or a friend or relative. If
available, documents from past school and college experience can
contribute to the history as well.
In reviewing your history, your physician will want to know about
the following ten areas. It will make your first visit more efficient and
productive if you go over these in your mind beforehand:
a. Family history. In your parents, grandparents, or extended
family, is there any history of ADD or hyperactivity (not likely, since
the diagnosis was not made frequently a generation ago, but if it was,
it is highly significant)? Any history of related disorders such as
depression, manic-depressive illness, alcoholism or other substance
abuse, antisocial behavior, or dyslexia or other learning disabilities?
If you are adopted, that itself is a significant finding, as ADD is much
higher among the adopted than among the general population.

b. Pregnancy and birth history. Were there risk factors such as
maternal drug use during pregnancy (including cigarettes and heavy
alcohol use), inadequate health care during pregnancy, any trauma
or oxygen deprivation during birth, any illness during the period just
after birth?
c. Medical and physical factors. Your doctor will take a standard
medical history, asking about past illnesses, surgeries, injuries, and
so forth. There will also be questions about what medications you
currently take, as well as about your use of alcohol, tobacco, cocaine,
marijuana, and other drugs. A sexual history should also be included.
People with ADD often have a variety of sexual problems, most
commonly hyposexuality or hypersexuality.
Your physician will ask about certain specific physical factors that
are often associated with ADD, including left-handedness or
ambidextrousness, frequent ear infections in childhood, upper
respiratory infections or other illnesses as a child, allergies, sleep
disturbances, especially great difficulty in falling asleep, or
frequently waking up during the night or trouble getting up in the
morning, awkwardness or clumsiness or poor hand-eye
coordination, bed-wetting as a child, accident-proneness as a child,
or high frequency of somatic complaints as a child.
d. Review what is called your “developmental history.” At what age
did you walk, talk, learn to read, etc? There are often erratic
developmental patterns in people with ADD. They will have been
advanced in some areas and delayed in others.
e. School history. How did you feel about school? What was it like
for you? This is a key question in your history. Many people with
ADD point to school as the first place they realized anything was
different about them. Were you slow to learn to read, to write? Did
you have trouble with organization, promptness, impulsivity? Were
teacher comments full of statements such as “If only Johnny could sit
still and pay attention …” or, “Johnny could do so much better if only

ADD point to school as the first place they realized anything was
different about them. Were you slow to learn to read, to write? Did
you have trouble with organization, promptness, impulsivity? Were
teacher comments full of statements such as “If only Johnny could sit
still and pay attention …” or, “Johnny could do so much better if only

he would buckle down …” or “Johnny is more interested in
socializing than studying …”? Was underachievement a pattern? Was
performance inconsistent, erratic?
f. Home history. Where younger children are concerned, the
physician will ask about behavior at key times of day, such as when
getting dressed in the morning, leaving for school, eating dinner with
the family, making the transition from one activity to another,
getting to sleep at night and getting up in the morning. In diagnosing
adolescents and adults the questions will likely be about such topics
as the appearance of their desks, any mess piles about house or
study, and the general level of disorganization or impending chaos.
There might also be questions about the number of high-stimulation
gadgets owned (i.e., computers, stereos, CDs, fax machines,
answering machines, video recorders, exercise machines, video
games, televisions, intercoms, satellite dishes, and portable or car
phones), and about length of time spent interacting with family as
opposed to going from project to project or sleeping.
g. College and other educational experience. Do you recall themes
of underachievement or special struggles? Any formally diagnosed
learning disabilities?
h. Job history. Have you seen a pattern of underachievement,
trouble with bosses, frequent job changes, or trouble with deadlines
and procrastination? Do you have a tendency to be a maverick at
work? Are you particularly innovative or creative? Are you a hard
worker? Is saying or doing the wrong thing at the wrong time a
recurring problem?
i. Interpersonal history. Have you experienced trouble staying
connected, either in a conversation or in a long-term relationship?
Do you particularly like people? Have you had a tendency to be
misunderstood interpersonally, your inattentiveness often being
mistaken for indifference?

j. Before your first visit with a professional, compare your history
(or your child’s) with the defining lists of symptoms in Tables I and
II and the Utah Criteria.
The formal diagnostic criteria for ADD in children, as set forth in
the standard psychiatric manual, DSM-III-R (Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual, third edition, revised), are summarized in Table
I.
The above criteria cover children. These criteria have been
statistically assessed—that is to say, they have been tested against
other criteria and with various groups of children to ascertain which
factors are most discriminating in diagnosing ADD. These criteria
are included in the diagnostic manual of psychiatry.
As yet, we do not have formal, statistically validated criteria for the
diagnosis of ADD in adults. It is only fairly recently that the
syndrome has even been recognized in the adult population.
However, based upon our clinical experience with hundreds of adults
with ADD, we set forth the criteria in Table II for making the
diagnosis of ADD in adults (this is an abbreviated version of the
symptoms discussed in chapter 3).
In addition to the criteria above, also rate yourself using Paul
Wender’s Utah Criteria. (These are referred to as the Utah Criteria

However, based upon our clinical experience with hundreds of adults
with ADD, we set forth the criteria in Table II for making the
diagnosis of ADD in adults (this is an abbreviated version of the
symptoms discussed in chapter 3).
In addition to the criteria above, also rate yourself using Paul
Wender’s Utah Criteria. (These are referred to as the Utah Criteria
because Wender is professor of psychiatry at the University of Utah
School of Medicine.)
Whatever diagnostic criteria one refers to, it cannot be stressed too
firmly how important it is not to diagnose oneself. While the
information and examples presented here may lead you to suspect
that you or your child or a relative has ADD, an evaluation by a
physician to confirm the diagnosis and to rule out other conditions is
essential.

3. Consider All Possibilities
In making the diagnosis, your physician must also rule out other
conditions that can look like ADD as well as look for conditions that
may occur with ADD. Often the diagnosis of ADD is missed because
the ADD is masked by some coexisting condition such as substance
abuse, depression, or anxiety. At other times the diagnosis is made
incorrectly when some medical condition such as hyperthyroidism is
causing the symptoms.
Table IV lists some of the conditions that may resemble ADD and
need to be ruled out in making the diagnosis, and some of the
conditions that may accompany or mask ADD. While you may not
know the exact nature of all the diagnoses in the list, it can be used as
a point of reference to ask your doctor about.
Most of these require an evaluation by a physician. Certain blood
tests may need to be ordered, such as thyroid-function tests, or other
kinds of medical diagnostic tests may be indicated, such as an
electroencephalogram. These are not always indicated, however.
Your physician will determine if they are.
Although a full discussion of what physicians call the differential
diagnosis—the complete list of possibilities that must be considered
before confirming one diagnosis—would require more medical
knowledge than this book presumes, a few remarks should be made.
TABLE I
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR ATTENTION-DEFICIT
HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER IN CHILDREN
 (according to DSM-III-R)
NOTE: Consider a criterion met only if the behavior is
considerably more frequent than that of most people of the
same mental age.

A. A disturbance of at least six months during which at least eight of
the following are present:
1. Often fidgets with hands or feet or squirms in seat (in
adolescents [or adults] may be limited to subjective feelings of
restlessness).
2. Has difficulty remaining in seat when required to do so.
3. Is easily distracted by extraneous stimuli.
4. Has difficulty awaiting turn in games or group situations.
5. Often blurts out answers to questions before they have been
completed.
6. Has difficulty following through on instructions from
others.
7. Has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play activities.
8. Often shifts from one uncompleted activity to another.
9. Has difficulty playing quietly.
10. Often talks excessively.
11. Often interrupts or intrudes on others.
12. Often does not seem to listen to what is being said to him
or her.
13. Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities at
school or at home.
14. Often engages in physically dangerous activities without
considering possible consequences.

10. Often talks excessively.
11. Often interrupts or intrudes on others.
12. Often does not seem to listen to what is being said to him
or her.
13. Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities at
school or at home.
14. Often engages in physically dangerous activities without
considering possible consequences.

NOTE: The above items are listed in descending order of
discriminating power based on data from a national field trial
of the DSM-III-R criteria for disruptive behavior disorders.
B. Onset before the age of seven.
C. Does not meet the criteria for a pervasive developmental disorder.
TABLE II
SUGGESTED DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR ATTENTION
DEFICIT DISORDER IN ADULTS
NOTE: Consider a criterion met only if the behavior is
considerably more frequent than that of most people of the
same mental age.
A. A chronic disturbance in which at least twelve of the following are
present:
1. A sense of underachievement, of not meeting one’s goals
(regardless of how much one has actually accomplished).
2. Difficulty getting organized.
3. Chronic procrastination or trouble getting started.
4. Many projects going simultaneously; trouble with followthrough.
5. A tendency to say what comes to mind without necessarily
considering the timing or appropriateness of the remark.
6. A frequent search for high stimulation.

7. An intolerance of boredom.
8. Easy distractibility, trouble focusing attention, tendency to
tune out or drift away in the middle of a page or a
conversation, often coupled with an ability to hyperfocus at
times.
9. Often creative, intuitive, highly intelligent.
10. Trouble in going through established channels, following
“proper” procedure.
11. Impatient; low tolerance of frustration.
12. Impulsive, either verbally or in action, as in impulsive
spending of money, changing plans, enacting new schemes or
career plans, and the like; hot-tempered.
13. A tendency to worry needlessly, endlessly; a tendency to
scan the horizon looking for something to worry about,
alternating with inattention to or disregard for actual dangers.
14. A sense of insecurity.
15. Mood swings, mood lability, especially when disengaged
from a person or a project.
16. Physical or cognitive restlessness.
17. A tendency toward addictive behavior.
18. Chronic problems with self-esteem.
19. Inaccurate self-observation.
20. Family history of ADD or manic-depressive illness or
depression or substance abuse or other disorders of impulse
control or mood.

B. Childhood history of ADD. (It may not have been formally
diagnosed, but in reviewing the history, one sees that the signs and
symptoms were there.)
C. Situation not explained by other medical or psychiatric condition.
TABLE III
UTAH CRITERIA FOR ADULT ADD
I. A childhood history of ADD with both attentional deficits and
motor hyperactivity, together with at least one of the following
characteristics: behavior problems in school, impulsivity,
overexcitability, and temper outbursts.
II. An adult history of persistent attentional problems and motor
hyperactivity together with two of the following five symptoms:
affective lability, hot temper, stress intolerance, disorganization, and
impulsivity.
TABLE IV
CONDITIONS THAT MAY ACCOMPANY, RESEMBLE, OR
MASK ADD
Anxiety disorder
Bipolar disorder or mania
Caffeinism (excessive coffee or cola drinking)
Conduct disorder (in children)
Depression
Disorders of impulse control (stealing, fire-setting, and the like)

affective lability, hot temper, stress intolerance, disorganization, and
impulsivity.
TABLE IV
CONDITIONS THAT MAY ACCOMPANY, RESEMBLE, OR
MASK ADD
Anxiety disorder
Bipolar disorder or mania
Caffeinism (excessive coffee or cola drinking)
Conduct disorder (in children)
Depression
Disorders of impulse control (stealing, fire-setting, and the like)

Fatigue, chronic
History of fetal alcohol syndrome
Hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism
Lead poisoning
Learning disabilities
Medications (e.g., phenobarbital and Dilantin)
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Oppositional disorder (in children)
Pathological gambling
Personality disorders, such as narcissistic, antisocial, borderline,
and passive-aggressive personality disorders
Pheochromocytoma
Posttraumatic stress disorder
Seizure disorder
Situational disturbances such as divorce or job loss or other
disruption in one’s life
Substance abuse (e.g., cocaine, alcohol, marijuana)
Tourette’s syndrome

As was pointed out in chapter 6 on the subtypes of ADD, attention
deficit disorder often hides behind other diagnoses, such as
depression; alcohol, marijuana, and cocaine abuse; pathological
gambling; and the others mentioned before. These diagnoses may
mask an underlying case of ADD or they may be hard to distinguish
from it. The childhood history is particularly helpful in untangling
this knot. Was there evidence of ADD in childhood? If there was,
then the presenting symptom of, say, substance abuse, may overlie a
case of ADD.
More difficult to distinguish are those conditions that develop out
of ADD, organically, like a limb. These are the personality styles that
people with ADD may evolve. They can look like what psychiatry
calls personality disorders. For example, consider the passiveaggressive personality. This is the person who cannot express
aggression directly. Instead, he expresses it passively, through
nonaction or nonresponse. Instead of telling his boss he disagrees
with him, he skips his appointment with him. Instead of telling his
wife he is angry with her, he buries his head behind the newspaper.
Instead of competing for the job he wants, he “forgets” to send in the
application on time. Traditionally, we understand the passiveaggressive style in psychodynamic terms and try to help the patient
work out, through psychotherapy, whatever fears he may have of
directly expressing aggressive feelings. However, forgetting, being
late, finding it difficult to tune in to conversations—these are what
ADD is all about. What gets labeled “passive-aggressive” may be
caused by a case of ADD.
Similarly, ADD may be the cause of behavior that seems
narcissistic. The narcissist, in simple terms, has trouble paying
attention to other people. He appears to be wrapped up in himself,
preoccupied with his own place in the world, and incapable of
genuine empathy or love. If this inability to attend to others can be
traced to the individual’s early life experiences of deprivation,
narcissism is a probable diagnosis, and the proper treatment would
then be psychotherapy or psychoanalysis. However, if the inability to

preoccupied with his own place in the world, and incapable of
genuine empathy or love. If this inability to attend to others can be
traced to the individual’s early life experiences of deprivation,
narcissism is a probable diagnosis, and the proper treatment would
then be psychotherapy or psychoanalysis. However, if the inability to

attend is due to ADD, psychotherapy or psychoanalysis will not help.
If the person receives treatment for ADD, the “narcissistic”
symptoms will fade, and the person will be able to engage with others
meaningfully.
It is critical that these distinctions be made as early as possible in
an individual’s life. A great deal of time can be lost treating the wrong
condition, or not treating the right one.

4. Proceed with Psychological Testing
Once your physician has made the diagnosis through consideration
of your history (or your child’s), and he has ruled out other
conditions, he then must decide whether to proceed with
psychological testing.
Psychological testing can be very helpful in elucidating any
associated learning disabilities or in uncovering other problems that
may not have surfaced in the history, such as a hidden depression or
problems with self-image or a hidden thought disorder or psychosis.
For example, projective testing examines what the subject projects,
without knowing it, onto the test stimulus. The classic example of a
projective test is the inkblot test (the Rorschach test is the most
famous). The person being tested is asked to look at a series of
standardized inkblots. What the subject “sees into” the inkblot is of
his own creation, and can help reveal what might be on his
unconscious mind. Sometimes people see scenes of extraordinary
violence or destruction in an inkblot; these people may be dealing
with pent-up rage or repressed memories of traumatic abuse. Some
people make up stories of great sadness based upon the inkblot;
these people may be dealing with hidden depression. Other people
see nothing but chaos and unrecognizable shapes in the blots; these
people may have an information-processing problem or even an
undetected psychosis.
Psychological testing can also offer evidence that helps confirm the
diagnosis of ADD. Certain subscales on the Wechsler tests of
intelligence, called the WISC in children and the WAIS in adults, are
typically low in people with ADD.
There are other tests of attention as well in what is called a
neuropsychological battery for ADD. It is up to the tester what test to
employ. There is no standard battery, but rather a range of tests from
which the tester may select. Testing of this kind is as much an art as
a science. The psychologist chooses which test to use depending
upon what question is presented. When ADD is the problem, or the

question, some psychologists use a test in which the subject is asked
to copy an abstract drawing from memory after looking at it for ten
seconds. Others use a test called the continuous-performance task in
which the subject must attend to patterns of flashing lights.
Whenever a prespecified pattern appears, the subject is supposed to
press a button; if that pattern does not appear, he is not supposed to
press the button. Taking this test is a lot like playing “Simon Says.”
Sometimes you press the button when you shouldn’t, and sometimes
you should press the button but you don’t. It all depends upon how
alert you can be. The test tries to assess both attention span and

press a button; if that pattern does not appear, he is not supposed to
press the button. Taking this test is a lot like playing “Simon Says.”
Sometimes you press the button when you shouldn’t, and sometimes
you should press the button but you don’t. It all depends upon how
alert you can be. The test tries to assess both attention span and
impulsivity: pressing the button when you should is a measure of
paying attention, and pressing the button when you shouldn’t is a
measure of impulsivity. The test is far from infallible, however.
Extraneous factors such as the subject’s motivation and mood, the
conditions of the room where the test is conducted, and the ease of
operation of the machine can greatly influence results.
Other examiners use the TOVA, or Test of Variability of Attention
in which the subject responds to different shapes flashed on a screen
under similar conditions as the continuous-performance task. Finally
there are the Eriksen Flanker Task and the Go/No-Go test. The
Flanker task is a response interference task that tests how well
subjects correctly respond to an arrow that points in the opposite
direction as flanking arrows (in comparison to the case where the
arrow points in the same direction as the flanking arrows). The
Go/No-Go test is basically the game “Simon Says”—you perform an
action in one condition, not in another.
Whatever the test, they all try to quantify attention, distractibility,
and impulsivity. No test pattern, however, can definitively rule in or
rule out the diagnosis of ADD. It can only support or detract from the
clinical evidence for the diagnosis.
A strong word of caution should be added here with respect to
psychological testing. Often people rely too heavily on psychological
testing to make the diagnosis of ADD. This is a grave error, however,

because psychological testing is often falsely negative. That is to say,
many people who do in fact have ADD appear not to have it when
given psychological tests.
This is because the testing procedure may temporarily treat the
ADD, obliterating the symptoms during the time of the testing. Three
of the best treatments for ADD are one-to-one tutoring, high
motivation, and novelty. People with ADD typically can focus in a
one-to-one setting while they become distractible in a group setting
such as a classroom, the workplace, or a party. Also in settings where
the individual is highly motivated, the symptoms of ADD often
disappear. And novel settings—unusual or new places—can stimulate
the person with ADD to such a degree that their attention becomes
focused. The procedure of psychological testing involves all three of
these “treatments” for ADD. It is done one-on-one, with the
psychologist guiding the individual orally through the tests, making
it difficult for him to tune out. The subject is typically highly
motivated, trying to “do well” on the test. And the testing situation is
highly stimulating due to its novelty. These three factors combine to
make the testing situation an almost ideal treatment for ADD, but a
far-from-ideal setting in which to detect ADD. One must be highly
skeptical of psychological testing that finds no evidence of ADD if the
clinical, real-life data supports the diagnosis.
Often the history is so complicated that no one thinks of ADD as
being part of the diagnosis. A patient whom I shall call Andrea came
to see me and recounted a three-year history of misunderstanding

skeptical of psychological testing that finds no evidence of ADD if the
clinical, real-life data supports the diagnosis.
Often the history is so complicated that no one thinks of ADD as
being part of the diagnosis. A patient whom I shall call Andrea came
to see me and recounted a three-year history of misunderstanding
and misery in the mental-health system. Brought to an emergency
room one morning in June because of light-headedness, Andrea
began a long process of being evaluated. All kinds of tests were done,
including X-rays and MRIs and various blood tests and metabolic
studies and tests of immune function, even a pregnancy test. When
no physical cause of her episode of light-headedness could be found,
Andrea was referred to a psychiatric unit.

Because of a series of misunderstandings, Andrea was found to be
violent and suicidal. What actually happened was one of those
comic-horror stories from the movies where one wrong conclusion
leads to another. She met with a psychiatrist and stated she was not
crazy. The psychiatrist, who was a rather by-the-book sort of fellow,
nodded and wrote down what she said. This angered Andrea. “Why
are you writing down what I say?” she asked. “Why don’t you talk to
me instead?”
“Have you been ignored a great deal in your life?” the psychiatrist
responded.
By the end of her psychiatric evaluation Andrea was so frustrated
that she picked up an ashtray from the psychiatrist’s desk and
threatened to throw it through the window if she were not released
immediately.
“Please do not do that,” the psychiatrist said calmly.
“How can you be so calm?” Andrea asked. “Can’t you see how
upset I am?”
“I can see that you are upset,” the psychiatrist replied.
“But you’re just sitting there like a bump on a log,” Andrea went
on. “No emotion. No response. Would it help if I said I was suicidal?
Then would you react?”
The psychiatrist did indeed react. Andrea was involuntarily
committed to the psychiatric unit on the grounds of being potentially
violent and suicidal.
By the time all the confusion had been resolved, Andrea had
developed quite a dislike for the mental-health field. On the other
hand, she needed help. While the light-headedness had not recurred,
her hospitalization had brought forth a number of complaints
Andrea’s husband had been sitting on. He was concerned that she

was nervous, forgetful, and unreliable. He was concerned that she
was moody and hot-tempered. He was concerned that she was
inconsistent with the children, and he was especially concerned that
she was drinking too much.
Andrea and her husband went into couples therapy. Their
relationship, if anything, got worse. Andrea’s symptoms did not
improve, and her husband was growing tired of the whole situation.
After a six-month trial separation, Andrea voluntarily checked into
an alcohol treatment unit. She had felt terribly guilty about the
separation and had indeed started drinking uncontrollably. A
counselor at the alcohol unit reviewed Andrea’s history and raised
the possibility of ADD. The question had never been raised before.
This was no one’s fault; it was at a time when almost nobody knew
about ADD. But the counselor at the alcohol unit did. His son was
being treated for ADD, and he had read a great deal on the subject.
“When that man described to me the symptoms of ADD,” Andrea
said to me, “I felt as if I was being given a reprieve. Suddenly, there

This was no one’s fault; it was at a time when almost nobody knew
about ADD. But the counselor at the alcohol unit did. His son was
being treated for ADD, and he had read a great deal on the subject.
“When that man described to me the symptoms of ADD,” Andrea
said to me, “I felt as if I was being given a reprieve. Suddenly, there
was an explanation other than my being a neurotic. I read everything
I could find. It all fit. I got my school records, and sure enough, they
were full of comments about how I couldn’t sit still and how I was
such a daydreamer.”
“What happened next?” I asked.
“My husband had to learn about ADD. It made sense to him, too.
Even if the medication hadn’t worked as well as it did, it was great
just to come out of the psychiatric nightmare. Finally, I had the right
diagnosis.”
If you think you may have ADD, first consult someone who has
experience with the condition. Child psychiatrists, neurologists,
psychologists, and pediatricians are the professionals most likely to
have developed expertise in recognizing ADD. Be sure to ask
whomever you consult if they have experience in diagnosing and

treating ADD, and whether that experience is with children, adults,
or both. The most important factor is not what degree the person has
but that he or she have considerable experience in evaluating ADD.
At some point in the process an M.D. should be involved to make
sure no medical condition is overlooked. If psychological testing is
deemed indicated, this should be done by someone with a Ph.D. in
clinical psychology. Make sure this person is trained in what is called
neuropsychological testing and has experience in testing for ADD
and learning disabilities.
Since ADD in adults is a relatively new “discovery,” it may be
difficult to find a clinician in your area with experience in treating
this disorder. Later in this chapter, and at the end of this book, you
will find listings of ADD resources. In addition, a good starting point
in locating a specialist is a medical school in your area. Also the state
medical society, psychiatric society, or psychological association can
be of assistance.
The following set of questions reflects those an experienced
diagnostician will ask. While this quiz cannot confirm the diagnosis,
the questions can increase the reader’s feel for what ADD is, and
offer a rough assessment as to whether professional help should be
sought to make the actual diagnosis of ADD.
The more questions that are answered “yes,” the more likely it is
that ADD may be present. Since everybody will answer “yes” to some
number of questions, and since we have not established norms for
this questionnaire, it should only be used as an informal gauge.
 1. Are you left-handed or ambidextrous?
2. Do you have a family history of drug or alcohol abuse,
depression, or manic-depressive illness?
 3. Are you moody?

that ADD may be present. Since everybody will answer “yes” to some
number of questions, and since we have not established norms for
this questionnaire, it should only be used as an informal gauge.
 1. Are you left-handed or ambidextrous?
2. Do you have a family history of drug or alcohol abuse,
depression, or manic-depressive illness?
 3. Are you moody?

 4. Were you considered an underachiever in school? Now?
 5. Do you have trouble getting started on things?
6. Do you drum your fingers a lot, tap your feet, fidget, or
pace?
 7. When you read, do you find that you often have to reread a
paragraph or an entire page because you are daydreaming?
 8. Do you tune out or space out a lot?
 9. Do you have a hard time relaxing?
10. Are you excessively impatient?
11. Do you find that you undertake many projects
simultaneously so that your life often resembles a juggler
who’s got six more balls in the air than he can handle?
12. Are you impulsive?
13. Are you easily distracted?
14. Even if you are easily distracted, do you find that there
are times when your power of concentration is laser-beam
intense?
15. Do you procrastinate chronically?
16. Do you often get excited by projects and then not follow
through?
17. More than most people, do you feel that it is hard for you
to make yourself understood?
18. Is your memory so porous that if you go from one room to
the next to get something, by the time you get to the next

room you’ve sometimes forgotten what you were looking for?
19. Do you smoke cigarettes?
20. Do you drink too much?
21. If you have ever tried cocaine, did you find that it helped
you focus and calmed you down, rather than making you
high?
22. Do you change the radio station in your car frequently?
23. Do you wear out your TV remote-control switch by
changing stations frequently?
24. Do you feel driven, as if an engine inside you won’t slow
down?
25. As a kid, were you called words like, “a daydreamer,”
“lazy,” “a spaceshot,” “impulsive,” “disruptive,” “lazy,” or just
plain “bad”?
26. In intimate relationships is your inability to linger over
conversations an impediment?
27. Are you always on the go, even when you don’t really
want to be?
28. More than most people, do you hate waiting in line?
29. Are you constitutionally incapable of reading the
directions first?
30. Do you have a hair-trigger temper?
31. Are you constantly having to sit on yourself to keep from
blurting out the wrong thing?

32. Do you like to gamble?
33. Do you feel like exploding inside when someone has
trouble getting to the point?
34. Were you hyperactive as a child?
35. Are you drawn to situations of high intensity?
36. Do you often try to do the hard things rather than what
comes easily to you?
37. Are you particularly intuitive?
38. Do you often find yourself involved in a situation without
having planned it at all?
39. Would you rather have your teeth drilled by a dentist
than make or follow a list?
40. Do you chronically resolve to organize your life better
only to find that you’re always on the brink of chaos?
41. Do you often find that you have an itch you cannot
scratch, an appetite for something “more” and you’re not sure
what it is?
42. Would you describe yourself as hypersexual?
43. One man who turned out to have adult ADD presented
with this unusual triad of symptoms: cocaine abuse, frequent
reading of pornography, and an addiction to crossword
puzzles. Can you understand him, even if you do not have

scratch, an appetite for something “more” and you’re not sure
what it is?
42. Would you describe yourself as hypersexual?
43. One man who turned out to have adult ADD presented
with this unusual triad of symptoms: cocaine abuse, frequent
reading of pornography, and an addiction to crossword
puzzles. Can you understand him, even if you do not have
those symptoms?
44. Would you consider yourself an addictive personality?
45. Are you more flirtatious than you really mean to be?

46. Did you grow up in a chaotic, boundaryless family?
47. Do you find it hard to be alone?
48. Do you often counter depressive moods by some sort of
potentially harmful compulsive behavior such as overworking,
overspending, overdrinking, or overeating?
49. Do you have dyslexia?
50. Do you have a family history of ADD or hyperactivity?
51. Do you have a really hard time tolerating frustration?
52. Are you restless without “action” in your life?
53. Do you have a hard time reading a book all the way
through?
54. Do you regularly break rules or minor laws rather than
put up with the frustration of obeying them?
55. Are you beset by irrational worries?
56. Do you frequently make letter or number reversals?
57. Have you been the driver and at fault in more than four
car accidents?
58. Do you handle money erratically?
59. Are you a gung-ho, go-for-it sort of person?
60. Do you find that structure and routine are both rare in
your life and soothing when you find them?
61. Have you been divorced more than once?

62. Do you struggle to maintain self-esteem?
63. Do you have poor hand-eye coordination?
64. As a kid, were you a bit of a klutz at sports?
65. Have you changed jobs a lot?
66. Are you a maverick?
67. Are memos virtually impossible for you to read or write?
68. Do you find it almost impossible to keep an updated
address book, phone book, or Rolodex?
69. Are you the life of the party one day and hangdog the
next?
70. Given an unexpected chunk of free time, do you often find
that you don’t use it well or get depressed during it?
71. Are you more creative or imaginative than most people?
72. Is paying attention or staying tuned in a chronic problem
for you?
73. Do you work best in short spurts?
74. Do you let the bank balance your checkbook?
75. Are you usually eager to try something new?
76. Do you find you often get depressed after a success?
77. Do you hunger after myths and other organizing stories?
78. Do you feel you fail to live up to your potential?

79. Are you particularly restless?
80. Were you a daydreamer in class?
81. Were you ever the class clown?
82. Have you ever been described as “needy” or even
“insatiable”?
83. Do you have trouble accurately assessing the impact you
have on others?
84. Do you tend to approach problems intuitively?
85. When you get lost, do you tend to “feel” your way along
rather than refer to a map?
86. Do you often get distracted during sex, even though you
like it?
87. Were you adopted?
88. Do you have many allergies?
89. Did you have frequent ear infections as a child?
90. Are you much more effective when you are your own
boss?
91. Are you smarter than you’ve been able to demonstrate?
92. Are you particularly insecure?
93. Do you have trouble keeping secrets?
94. Do you often forget what you’re going to say just as you’re
about to say it?

WHAT CAN YOU DO ABOUT IT?

THE TREATMENT OF ADD
General Principles of Treatment
Most people who discover they have ADD, whether children or
adults, have suffered a great deal of pain. The emotional experience
of ADD is filled with embarrassment, humiliation, and selfcastigation. By the time the diagnosis is made, many people with
ADD have lost confidence in themselves. Many have been
misunderstood repeatedly. Many have consulted with numerous
specialists, only to find no real help. As a result, many have lost hope.
Individuals with ADD may have forgotten what is good about
themselves. They may have lost any sense of the possibility of things
working out. They are often locked into a kind of tenacious holding
pattern, needing all their considerable resiliency and ingenuity just
to keep their heads above water.
And yet their capacity to hope and to dream is immense. More
than most people, individuals with ADD have visionary
imaginations. They think big thoughts and dream big dreams. They
can take the smallest opportunity and imagine turning it into a major
break. They can take a chance encounter and turn it into a grand
evening out.
But like most dreamers, they go limp when the dream collapses.
Usually, by the time an individual seeks help, this collapse has
happened often enough to leave them wary of hoping again.
Hope begins with the diagnosis. More than with most disorders,
often just the making of the diagnosis of ADD exerts a powerful
therapeutic effect. The walls of years of misunderstanding come
crashing down under the force of a lucid explanation of the cause of
the individual’s problems.
While with other medical conditions the diagnosis directs the
treatment, with ADD, to a large extent, the diagnosis is the
treatment. The diagnosis brings great relief in and of itself. For
example, if you were nearsighted and had never heard of

nearsightedness, and for years you had thought your blurry vision
and subsequent learning problems were due to lack of effort or moral
turpitude, imagine your relief in discovering that there was this
condition called nearsightedness, and it had nothing to do with effort
or morality, but rather was a neurological condition. So it is with
ADD. The diagnosis is liberating.
Everything else in the treatment evolves logically from an
understanding of the diagnosis.

EDUCATION
Once the diagnosis has been made, the next step is to learn as
much as possible about the condition. The more you know, the better
you will be able to construct your treatment to meet your own needs,
and the better able you will be to understand your life story in terms
of ADD. Effective treatment often requires a radical rethinking of
your view of yourself. Understanding the many forms ADD takes will
help you not only to recognize how it affects you, but also to explain
the syndrome to those around you—family, friends, colleagues,
teachers.
The ability to educate those around you is crucial. ADD has a deep
social impact: it affects your home, work, or school environments, as
well as your internal life. You need to be able to explain what is going
on inside you to those who share the world you move in. For
example, if you are able to explain what ADD is to your boss in terms
that he or she can understand and sympathize with, you may be able
to greatly improve the conditions under which you work. Similarly, if
you can explain ADD to your spouse or partner in human terms, you

on inside you to those who share the world you move in. For
example, if you are able to explain what ADD is to your boss in terms
that he or she can understand and sympathize with, you may be able
to greatly improve the conditions under which you work. Similarly, if
you can explain ADD to your spouse or partner in human terms, you
may be able to put the relationship on a whole new footing. In
general, the ability to advocate for yourself intelligently is crucial in
the successful management of a life with ADD, and it depends upon
knowing as much as possible about the syndrome.
As you learn about ADD, you change yourself. You give yourself a
power you never had before, and the power resides in the knowledge.
Your knowledge becomes a part of you and silently, subtly works to
move you to a new place.
The treatment of ADD is not passive, not something one reclines to
receive. Rather, the treatment is an active process involving work
and study.
In adults the process of education is straightforward: through
reading, attending lectures, talking to experts and to others who have
ADD, you gradually learn as much as you can about it. In children,

however, the process raises questions in most parents’ and teachers’
minds. How much do we tell a child? At what age is he or she old
enough to know what ADD is? Should other children in the class
know if one child has it? What if the child thinks the diagnosis really
means he or she is stupid? How much should a child know about
medication?
These are difficult questions. There is no “right” answer. However,
based on extensive experience with many children, families, and
schools, I have found the following principle to be the best guide: tell
the truth.
Telling the truth to the child, and to the school, helps de-stigmatize
ADD. It helps normalize the syndrome. By not requiring one to skip
over certain points or invent childlike euphemisms, it also allows one
to convey the information in the simplest and most accurate way.
Instead of resorting to some disguised version of the truth—which
the child can usually see through anyway, and which conveys a
message of secrecy and danger—telling the truth implies there’s
nothing to hide, nothing to fear, nothing to be ashamed of.
When I explain ADD to a child, I usually do so in the presence of
one or both parents. I do not use a script, but a typical introduction
to ADD might go like this (bear in mind that throughout I pause
frequently for questions and I make sure the child does ask a
question or two; it is a complete waste of time to deliver a monologue
to children with ADD—they stop listening after two sentences):
As you know, Jimmy, you and your mom and dad have been
coming here to talk about how things are going at home and at
school. I have found out something about you that I think will
help you. We have talked about what school is like for you,
and you have told me that you have a lot of trouble paying
attention and listening and that you like to look out the
window and that it is hard for you to sit still and wait in line
and raise your hand and all those kinds of things. Boy, do I

help you. We have talked about what school is like for you,
and you have told me that you have a lot of trouble paying
attention and listening and that you like to look out the
window and that it is hard for you to sit still and wait in line
and raise your hand and all those kinds of things. Boy, do I

know how you feel. Do you know why that is? It is because
both you and I have something called attention deficit
disorder.
Attention deficit disorder, or ADD, is sort of like being
nearsighted and needing glasses, except the nearsightedness
isn’t in our eyes. It’s in how we think. We need glasses for how
we think, to help us focus our attention so we won’t daydream
so much or change the subject so much or forget things so
much or have so much trouble getting organized in the
morning or after class.
Having ADD does not mean we are stupid. Lots of really
smart people have had ADD, like Thomas Edison and Mozart
and Einstein and the actor Dustin Hoffman—do you know
who he is? What we people with ADD do need is special help—
like glasses—so we can do the best we can. Only the special
help we need isn’t glasses exactly, but other things that help us
focus and get organized. Sometimes lists, reminders, and
schedules help us. Sometimes a tutor or a coach can help. And
sometimes medication can help.
Lots of other kids have ADD. If anyone asks you about it, it
is up to you what you want to tell them, but remember, there
is nothing wrong with having ADD, any more than there is
anything wrong with wearing glasses.
I try to be as simple and honest as possible. I believe what I say:
there is nothing wrong with having ADD, and there is nothing to be
ashamed of. Most children take some time to get used to the idea of
having ADD. Most children are ashamed or embarrassed at first.
However, I have found that the sooner the topic can be brought out
into the open and all questions addressed clearly, the sooner the
condition can be accepted by the child as just another part of his or
her everyday life.

I give the same advice to classroom teachers. Tell the truth. If a
child is receiving special treatment for ADD, the other kids should be
told about this and told why. The other children will notice
something is going on anyway; they might as well know what it is.
Otherwise the treatment will be shrouded in secrecy, and secrecy
always implies there is something to hide. I suggest that the teacher
first of all get the permission of the parents and the child, and then
explain to the class what ADD is, and what special treatment the
child will be receiving, such as sitting close to the teacher, taking
untimed tests, having permission to leave the classroom when he or
she feels overstimulated or to get medication if that is part of the
regimen, receiving individualized homework assignments, and so
forth. Since an individualized classroom treatment plan should be set
up for the child with ADD anyway, and since the other children will
notice it, it is best if they have an accurate explanation for it, rather
than allowing the rumor mill to generate an inaccurate one.
Furthermore, it is almost certain that other children in the class will
have either ADD or some other form of learning disorder. The sooner
these conditions can be normalized and understood for what they
are, the better for everyone.
These suggestions to parents and teachers for explaining ADD to
children are summarized as follows:

Furthermore, it is almost certain that other children in the class will
have either ADD or some other form of learning disorder. The sooner
these conditions can be normalized and understood for what they
are, the better for everyone.
These suggestions to parents and teachers for explaining ADD to
children are summarized as follows:
TEN TIPS FOR PARENTS AND TEACHERS ON
EXPLAINING ADD TO CHILDREN
1. Tell the truth. This is the central, guiding principle. First,
educate yourself about ADD, then put what you have learned into
your own words, words the child can understand. Don’t just hand
the child a book or send the child off to some professional for an
explanation. Explain it to yourself, after you have learned about
it, then explain it to the child. Be straightforward and honest and
clear.

2. Use an accurate vocabulary. Don’t make up words that have
no meaning, or use inaccurate words. The child will carry the
explanation you give him wherever he or she goes.
3. The metaphor of nearsightedness is a useful one to use in
explaining ADD to children. It is accurate and emotionally
neutral.
4. Answer questions. Ask for questions. Remember, children
often have questions you cannot answer. Don’t be afraid to say
you don’t know. Then go find the answer. Books by
professionals who deal with ADD are good sources of
information; see, for example, Paul Wender’s Hyperactive
Children, Adolescents, and Adults, and Russell Barkley’s
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, and CHADD
(Children with Attention Deficit Disorders), a national
organization devoted to educating parents, teachers, and
professionals about ADD (CHADD, www.chadd.org; 8181
Professional Place-Suite 150, Landover, MD 20785;
telephone: 301-306-7070).
5. Be sure to tell the child what ADD is not: stupidity,
retardation, defectiveness, badness, etc.
6. Give examples of positive role models, either from history,
such as Thomas Edison, or from personal experience, like a
family member (Mom or Dad?).
7. If possible, let others know the child has ADD. Let the
others in the classroom know (after discussing this with the
child and parents), and let others in the extended family
know. Again, the message should be that there is nothing to
hide, nothing to be ashamed of.
8. Caution the child not to use ADD as an excuse. Most kids,
once they catch on to what ADD is, go through a phase of

trying to use it as an excuse. ADD is an explanation, not an
excuse. They still have to take responsibility for what they do.
9. Educate others. Educate the other parents and children in
the classroom. Educate members of the extended family. The
single strongest weapon we have to ensure that children get
proper treatment is knowledge. Spread the knowledge as far
as you can; there is still a great deal of ignorance and
misinformation out there about ADD.
10. Coach the child on how he might answer questions other
people might have, especially peers. The guiding principle is
the same: tell the truth. You might try role-playing a scene
where a peer is teasing the child in order to anticipate and
deal with such a problem in advance.

misinformation out there about ADD.
10. Coach the child on how he might answer questions other
people might have, especially peers. The guiding principle is
the same: tell the truth. You might try role-playing a scene
where a peer is teasing the child in order to anticipate and
deal with such a problem in advance.

STRUCTURE
The new understanding of oneself that the diagnosis and education
provide leads naturally to a rearranging or restructuring of one’s life,
both internally and externally. By taking ADD into account and
trying to get rid of long-held negative perceptions of oneself, one
rethinks or reshapes one’s self-image; this is the internal
restructuring. And one rearranges the nuts and bolts of one’s daily
life, setting up means of improved organization and control; this is
the external restructuring.
Structure is central in the treatment of ADD. The word “structure”
is a homely one, perhaps conjuring up dull images of blueprints or
two-by-fours. However, structure can dazzle with its results.
Structure makes possible the expression of talent. Without structure,
no matter how much talent there may be, there is only chaos. Think
of what a tight structure Mozart worked within. The very tightness of
the structure helped create the intensity of the expression of Mozart’s
genius. Whether it be the iambic pentameter of Shakespeare or the
rhymed couplets of Pope or the rhythm of the long-distance runner
or the timing of the short-order cook, all creative expression requires
structure. Many adults with ADD have not fulfilled their considerable
creative potential because they have been unable to shape and direct
their creative energies.
Think of a thermometer and the mercury it contains. If you have
ever broken a thermometer, you know what happens to the mercury.
The ADD mind is like spilled mercury, running and beading.
Structure is the vessel needed to contain the mercury of the ADD
mind, to keep it from being here and there and everywhere all at
once. Structure allows the ADD mind to be put to best use, rather
than dissipating itself like so many tiny beads of mercury on the
floor.
Structure refers to essential tools like lists, reminders, notepads,
appointment books, filing systems, Rolodexes, bulletin boards,
schedules, receipts, IN- and OUT-boxes, answering machines,

computer systems, alarm clocks, and alarm watches. Structure refers
to the set of external controls that one sets up to compensate for
unreliable internal controls. Most people with ADD cannot depend
upon their internal controls to keep things organized and to keep
themselves on task over time. For them a reliable system of external
controls is essential. Setting up a system does not have to be boring;
in fact, one can be quite creative in devising a workable structure.
And once in place, the system will be calming and confidencebuilding.
We particularly recommend a scheme of reorganizing one’s life
that we call pattern planning. This system of time management
operates on the same principle as automatic withdrawals from your
bank account: by making the withdrawals (of money or time) from
your account automatic, you don’t have to plan them every time; they
just happen. You plug certain regular appointments or obligations
into the pattern of your week so you attend to them automatically.
This frees up your limited planning time to focus on other activities.
Simple in its conception, pattern planning can reduce the stresses of

your account automatic, you don’t have to plan them every time; they
just happen. You plug certain regular appointments or obligations
into the pattern of your week so you attend to them automatically.
This frees up your limited planning time to focus on other activities.
Simple in its conception, pattern planning can reduce the stresses of
planning one’s life considerably.
It is easy to set up. You start by making a list of all the regular
tasks, obligations, and appointments you have every week—your
fixed-time expenditures, so to speak. You then make a grid of your
week on a calendar or appointment book and plug each fixed
obligation into a regular time slot. For example, you may decide you
will pick up your dry cleaning every Thursday afternoon at 4:30; you
will work out Wednesday and Friday at 7 A.M.; you will go to the bank
Monday and Thursday at noon; and you will attend your professional
seminar alternate Tuesdays at 6 P.M.
Before you know it, these regular appointments take root in your
subconscious. Thursday afternoon becomes dry cleaners’ time, and
after a while you drive to the cleaners almost without thinking about
it. Wednesdays and Fridays become work-out time, and not only
does the time become automatically reserved for you, but also you do

not have to worry about when you will find the time to work out. You
have decided in advance, not impulsively, what you want to make
enough of a priority to pre-plan, and where to put each such activity
or obligation. You know that you will do these things, and you know
when you will do them. This means you do not need to wonder every
day when you will get to the dry cleaners, or if you will get to the
bank, or how you will find time to work out, or whether you can ever
make it to that professional seminar again.
Through the use of pattern planning you can streamline your life
considerably. It is remarkable how much mental energy the planning
of these humdrum, everyday tasks can take, and how easy pattern
planning can make them.
People with ADD can spend a lifetime dodging the necessity of
organizing themselves. They avoid getting organized the way some
people avoid going to the dentist: repeatedly postponing it as the
problem gets worse and worse. One man hadn’t paid his taxes in
eight years, not because he was protesting or didn’t have the money
but because he couldn’t face up to the organizational task of doing so.
A woman was on the brink of divorce because her inability to throw
anything away had led to her house being overrun with junk.
Another man cost himself literally tens of thousands of dollars a year
in tax deductions because he felt constitutionally incapable of saving
receipts. The task of getting organized, one that bedevils us all,
particularly vexes the ADD mind.
“Vexes” is an understatement in children with ADD. The failure to
get organized can be the ruination not only of the child with ADD but
of the whole family. Disorganization is a time-honored component of
any normal, ordinary childhood, or one hopes it is. The “too-neat”
child has problems of his or her own. But the child with ADD can go
to the other extreme.
For example, I once treated an eleven-year-old boy named Charlie.
A Tom Sawyer clone, Charlie was unintentionally making his family

of the whole family. Disorganization is a time-honored component of
any normal, ordinary childhood, or one hopes it is. The “too-neat”
child has problems of his or her own. But the child with ADD can go
to the other extreme.
For example, I once treated an eleven-year-old boy named Charlie.
A Tom Sawyer clone, Charlie was unintentionally making his family

crazy due to his completely disorganized ways. Together, as a family,
we zeroed in on key problem areas. One in particular enraged Molly,
his fifteen-year-old sister: Charlie left the bathroom a mess every
morning just before Molly used it. He would leave his underwear on
the floor, a dirty towel in the bathtub, bits of toothpaste stuck to the
sink, dirty handprints on the mirror, the toilet seat up (often covered
with evidence of Charlie’s poor aim), the water dripping, and the fan
turned off so that steam still filled the room. Molly had asked Charlie
a hundred times about these things, and he always told her he’d try
to do better, but nothing changed. She wanted to kill him, or at least
maim him severely.
After some negotiation we came up with the following plan.
Charlie and his sister wrote up a list of ten items that Charlie needed
to check off before leaving the bathroom each morning. They posted
the list on the inside of the bathroom door where Charlie could not
miss seeing it. Each morning Charlie checked off the list before he
left the bathroom. He also added an eleventh item to the list which
he happily checked off last. It read, “I’m outta here!!!” This simple
plan, this bit of structure, worked very well. Charlie and Molly made
up, with Charlie unmaimed.
Some tips might be useful in helping children with ADD get
organized.
TEN TIPS ON STRUCTURING AND ORGANIZING THE
LIFE OF THE CHILD WITH ADD
1. Write down the problem. Sit down with the child—or the whole
family—and write down exactly where the problem areas are—the
dining-room table, the bedroom, the bathroom, wherever. It is
good to define, and thereby limit, the problem instead of leaving
it in the realm of the infinite.
2. Come up with specific remedies for each problem area.

3. Make use of concrete reminders like lists, schedules, alarm
clocks, and the like.
4. Incentive plans are fine. Don’t think of them as bribes, but
rather as incentives. Children with ADD are born
entrepreneurs.
5. Give frequent feedback. Kids with ADD often don’t see what
they are doing as they are doing it. Don’t wait until the house
is completely torn apart before suggesting that it be put back
together.
6. Give responsibility wherever possible. For example, if the
child is old enough to get up on his own in the morning, give
him the responsibility for doing that. If he misses his ride to
school, let him pay for a cab out of allowance or other
earnings.
7. Make copious use of praise and positive feedback. More
than most people, people with ADD blossom under the
warmth of praise.
8. Consider using a coach or tutor when it comes to
schoolwork. You do not want to give up your role as parent to
an ad hoc role of supervisor-tutor-badgerer-teacher.
9. Provide the child with whatever devices he or she
demonstrates can help. Ask the child what will help.
Experiment with different plans and devices. One child
organized his homework by setting his alarm clock to go off at
twenty-minute intervals; he would plan out his homework in
twenty-minute chunks. Another child found that a word

9. Provide the child with whatever devices he or she
demonstrates can help. Ask the child what will help.
Experiment with different plans and devices. One child
organized his homework by setting his alarm clock to go off at
twenty-minute intervals; he would plan out his homework in
twenty-minute chunks. Another child found that a word
processor made the task of writing immensely easier. Another
found that studying with earphones on allowed for better
concentration. Use as your guiding principle: whatever works
(but isn’t illegal or dangerous).

10. Always remember: negotiate, don’t struggle.

PSYCHOTHERAPY AND COACHING
The person with ADD can best get started in treatment for ADD by
establishing a relationship with a therapist who knows about both
ADD and psychotherapy.
Your therapist must keep several issues in mind. While attending
to your neurological problems, the therapist should help you grapple
with your emotional problems as well. He or she should remain
attuned to the omnipresent therapy issues of hidden meanings,
covert signals, concealed motives, repressed memories, and
unspoken desires. Your therapist should leave aside all preconceived
ideas derived from diagnosis and should seek first of all to know you
as you really are. You should feel understood. This may sound
simple, but there is probably no act between two humans that
requires greater skill.
We must underline this point with a thick red pencil: the
treatment of ADD should never overlook that the patient is a person
first, and a person with ADD second. While the symptoms of ADD
may dominate the picture, they should never be allowed to supercede
the patient’s humanity. The patient needs the chance, as we all do, to
be heard and understood as an individual, with a specific history, an
idiosyncratic set of habits and tastes, a personal chest of drawers of
memories and mementos, not as just another person who has ADD.
While your therapist may know a lot about ADD, he or she knows
nothing of your particular life. Indeed, what keeps the therapy fresh
and exciting is not what your therapist knows, but what he or she
does not know. Your therapist must stand ready and eager to learn
from you.
The feeling within you of being understood can heal more wounds
than any medication or kind words or bits of advice. And the only
way for you to find this feeling of being understood is for your
therapist to take the time to listen, and it does take time, and to
apply the discipline of staying with you, and it does take discipline.

With time, and with work, your therapist and you can build, syllable
by syllable, image by image, a sense of being known, and sometimes
known for the first time.
Once this human bond has been established, or, really, while it is
being established, some kind of external supports can help a great
deal in restructuring one’s life. People with ADD do very well when
given support. While you may never get organized on your own, if
you feel a part of a team, you will do much better.
We particularly like the idea of a coach. This person may also be a
therapist, but need not be. It may be a friend or a colleague, anyone
who knows something about ADD and is willing to put in the time—
ten or fifteen minutes a day—to coach.
What is an ADD coach? The person is just what the name implies:
an individual standing on the sidelines with a whistle around his or
her neck barking out encouragement, directions, and reminders to

who knows something about ADD and is willing to put in the time—
ten or fifteen minutes a day—to coach.
What is an ADD coach? The person is just what the name implies:
an individual standing on the sidelines with a whistle around his or
her neck barking out encouragement, directions, and reminders to
the player in the game. The coach can be a pain in the neck
sometimes, dogging the player to stay alert, in the game, and the
coach can be a source of solace when the player feels ready to give
up. Mainly, the coach keeps the player focused on the task at hand
and offers encouragement along the way.
Particularly in the beginning phases of treatment—the first couple
of months—the coach can stave off a reversion to old bad habits:
habits of procrastination, disorganization, and negative thinking, the
most damaging and pernicious of which is the negative thinking.
Treatment begins with hope, with a jump-start of the heart. A coach,
someone on the outside, can holler at the ADD mind when it starts
down the old negative grooves and bring it back to a positive place.

Tips for the Coach
At the beginning of treatment there should be brief (ten-to-fifteenminute) daily check-ins with the coach, in person or over the phone.
The discussion should focus on the practical and concrete—what are
your plans? what is due tomorrow? what are you doing to get ready
for tomorrow?—as well as on the abstract—how do you feel? what is
your mood? These questions can be organized by the initials
H.O.P.E. as follows:
H—Help: Ask the person you are coaching, what kind of help do
you need? Begin by getting an update and seeing what specific
assistance is needed.
O—Obligations: Ask specifically what obligations are upcoming
and what the person is doing to prepare for them. You must ask. If
you don’t ask, the individual may forget to tell you.
P—Plans: Ask about ongoing plans. It is very helpful to remind
people with ADD of their goals. They often forget them, quite
literally, and so stop working toward them. If they say they don’t
know what their goals are, try to help them define them. Goals
function as a kind of guard against aimlessness, drawing the
individual through time toward a desired place.
E—Encouragement: The most fun part of the coach’s job. The
coach should really get into it and not be embarrassed to be rah-rah.
The coach is joining a battle against chaos and negativity; the more
affirmative he or she can be the better. Don’t be daunted by cynicism.
It takes a while to undo a lifetime of negativity.
Traditional psychotherapy is sometimes indicated for people with
ADD because of the problems with self-esteem, anxiety, and
depression that build up in the wake of ADD. While the primary
problem of ADD is best treated with structure, medication, and
coaching, the secondary psychological problems often require

Traditional psychotherapy is sometimes indicated for people with
ADD because of the problems with self-esteem, anxiety, and
depression that build up in the wake of ADD. While the primary
problem of ADD is best treated with structure, medication, and
coaching, the secondary psychological problems often require

ongoing psychotherapy. It is a mistake to treat the primary problems
of attention, distractibility, impulsivity, and restlessness and
overlook the considerable secondary problems with self-esteem,
depression, or marital or family discord.
In doing psychotherapy with adults with ADD, the therapist will
help structure sessions; he or she will be quite active. The
fundamental rule of psychoanalysis, for the patient to say whatever
comes to mind, often leaves the person with ADD at a complete loss.
There is so much coming to mind that you don’t know where to
begin. Or, once you do begin, you don’t know where to stop. You may
become flooded, not with interesting unconscious material, but with
bushels of detritus—useless material that risks turning the
psychotherapy into a kind of aimless monologue, going nowhere,
frustrating both you and the therapist.
If your therapist can provide some structure and direction, you can
often get on track. If you have trouble getting started, your therapist
might ask a directive question, like “How is that problem with your
boss working out?” Or if you start to go off on a tangent that seems to
be leading nowhere, your therapist might try to help by bringing you
back to the original subject. This is quite counter to what a good
therapist usually does in open-ended, insight-oriented
psychotherapy. In that kind of therapy the therapist often wishes the
patient would get off track, would let go of conscious control to some
extent in order to uncover what lies beneath the surface. However, in
patients with ADD this approach can backfire, leaving both patient
and therapist lost in a meaningless maze made of distractions and
incomplete thoughts and images.
If you have ADD, you need the therapist to guide you through your
thoughts and associations, helping you prioritize your mental
productions and pay attention to what is germane while letting go of
what is extraneous. If in the process you let go of a pearl, that is too
bad; but it is better than spending the whole therapy shucking pearlless oysters.

Let me give an example to illustrate this point. At the beginning of
a session one of my patients, a forty-two-year-old man in treatment
for ADD and depression, said, “Well, I sure won’t be needing my
wife’s money anymore.” His reliance on his wife’s considerable
inherited wealth had become a central issue in therapy because it
undermined his sense of independence and self-esteem. In fact, he
relied on it only in his imagination, as the couple lived on the
incomes each member earned, and they earned about the same
amount.
In response to his question I looked interested and said, “Oh,
really, why is that?”
“Because I’ve had a breakthrough. The store has said they will pay
me to get special training that will enable me to take over the whole
department probably in about a year.”
“Really,” I said, hoping for more.
“Yes, but I also want to talk to you about the elevator in this
building. Why can’t they get it fixed? It’s a real pain walking up four
flights of stairs.”
Now at this point I had a decision to make. In psychotherapy with

me to get special training that will enable me to take over the whole
department probably in about a year.”
“Really,” I said, hoping for more.
“Yes, but I also want to talk to you about the elevator in this
building. Why can’t they get it fixed? It’s a real pain walking up four
flights of stairs.”
Now at this point I had a decision to make. In psychotherapy with
a patient without ADD, I would probably remain silent, or I would
ask more about the elevator, thinking in the back of my mind that the
patient was inching in on significant transference feelings, feelings
about me, his therapist, through his feelings about the elevator, and
the pain it caused him to get to me, to our sessions. Why couldn’t I
make it easier? he might be asking me. Why couldn’t I take better
care of my building, of my elevator, of my patients, of him? Couldn’t
I be relied on for that much? Or, looking for past memories or
unconscious fantasies, I might ask for my patient’s associations to
elevators. Sometimes such a question can jar an old memory loose
and lead to a whole new and unexpected vein of material. On the
other hand, my patient’s bringing up the subject of the broken

elevator right on the heels of announcing a big promotion certainly
could make me wonder if he did not feel conflicted about the
promotion. Did the promotion make him think of things that needed
repair, like the elevator, like himself? Was he wondering, in the
punning way the unconscious often uses, if he were “up” to the job, if
he were entitled to “rise” in his field, or if he needed an extra “lift,”
perhaps from me? With another patient I might have pursued any or
all of these ideas.
However, with this patient, I simply said, “I know the broken
elevator is annoying. I am told it will be fixed this week. But I’m
interested in hearing more about your feelings about the new
development at work.” It may be argued that in doing this—
essentially redirecting the patient back toward what I thought was
most important—I lost an opportunity. But I did not want to lose the
opportunity the patient had presented at the start of the session in
telling about his possible promotion at work. In looking at both
opportunities, I decided to take over and choose the promotion as
what we should focus on.
Now if the man had responded, “No, I really want to talk about the
elevator,” I of course would have let him. But he didn’t. Instead, he
very easily glided back into talking about the promotion, as if that
was what he had really wanted to talk about in the first place.
I had to decide whether he brought up the topic of the elevator for
hidden reasons we had best look at, or if he brought it up just
because it popped into his head, for no significant reason, like a
distraction, like the sound of a train whistle outside my window or
the telephone ringing in the next office. In making the decision I did,
I was taking on the role of distraction censor, a role I often play with
my patients who have ADD. The risk inherent in making such a
decision for my patient is that I would unintentionally sidestep
important material.

distraction, like the sound of a train whistle outside my window or
the telephone ringing in the next office. In making the decision I did,
I was taking on the role of distraction censor, a role I often play with
my patients who have ADD. The risk inherent in making such a
decision for my patient is that I would unintentionally sidestep
important material.

Your therapist must make this kind of determination all the time
in doing psychotherapy with you, if you have ADD. Even with people
who do not have ADD, the therapist must constantly weigh what is
heard and consider what to focus on and what to let slide by.
However, with patients who have ADD, the therapist has to be more
active along these lines than with other people.
In addition, your therapist should take into account your
perceptual problems in getting a sense of social situations. Often
people with ADD respond inappropriately or awkwardly to other
people. Sometimes they appear to be self-centered and remarkably
unaware of the needs of others. Consider the following scene as an
example.
Dave, a thirty-five-year-old man with ADD paused at the office
water cooler for a drink. As he was sipping his spring water, a friend
joined him at the cooler. “Hi, Dave,” the friend said, filling his conic
cup. Dave did not respond. “Be nice to get these estimates out on
time, for once, huh? You’ve done a great job.” Dave still didn’t say
anything. “You must have been here late last night?”
Dave, who had been thinking about how to construct a threedimensional oval, like an egg, for his daughter’s science project,
threw his cup in the metal trash basket, saw his friend, grunted, and
headed back toward his office. His friend called after him, “Nice
talking to you, Dave.” Dave didn’t stop. His friend registered this
encounter as just another example of spacey Dave being spacey
Dave.
It is not that Dave was too selfish to acknowledge or hear his
friend. It is that he was mentally elsewhere. It would be important
for his therapist to know of this tendency and to give practical advice
on how to handle social situations. By practical advice I mean
concrete pointers such as “When you are at the water cooler, a
central stopping place, keep it in mind that other people might walk
up to you,” or “When you see a friend, don’t just grunt, say

something, give a real response,” or “In conversation, make eye
contact and listen before you start to speak.” These kinds of counsel
—concrete, obvious, perhaps tedious—can help a person with ADD
immensely. People with ADD may not make friends or do well
socially simply because they don’t know how. They don’t know the
rules. They don’t know the steps of the dance. They have never been
taught what we all assume everyone learns as second nature. People
with ADD may lack this second nature. They may need lessons in
how to interact. Social “reading” can be as difficult for these people
as the reading of words. As painfully obvious as these social lessons
may be to the socially adept, to the person with ADD, who can feel as
lost in a conversation as he does in the middle of a written page,
these lessons can impart nothing less than the ability to make
contact with other people.
Having stressed the importance of “coaching,” and the importance
of focusing and directing the psychotherapy in working with patients
with ADD, let us also make it clear that the work you and your
therapist do is not simpleminded. While coaching may sound simple

these lessons can impart nothing less than the ability to make
contact with other people.
Having stressed the importance of “coaching,” and the importance
of focusing and directing the psychotherapy in working with patients
with ADD, let us also make it clear that the work you and your
therapist do is not simpleminded. While coaching may sound simple
—and, indeed, at its best it is simple, deceptively simple—and while
focusing the therapy may sound like a kind of traffic control—
stopping this conversation, whistling it over there—the work can also
be as subtle, unpredictable, and imaginative as any kind of
psychotherapy.
While individual therapy marks the starting point for most people
with ADD, additional forms of psychotherapy can be extremely
helpful, particularly family therapy, couples therapy, and group
therapy. The main issues that come up in couples and families were
discussed in previous chapters, so we will discuss here only group
therapy.
Groups—for any problem, not just ADD—can mobilize positive
energy in ways that are truly remarkable. When groups are properly
run, they are a safe, cost-effective, and highly successful kind of

therapy for ADD. This applies to both children and adults. Indeed,
with children individual therapy may not get at the real problems at
all, because the problems only come up in groups. The child may sit
with his or her individual therapist and happily play games, all the
while showing none of the symptoms that cause the big problems in
everyday life at school and at home. However, group therapy for
children can address the issues as they come up, head on, in situ, as
it were, in the group. For example, a child who cannot pay attention
when other children are around will not show this in individual
therapy. Or a child who becomes disruptive when asked to share with
other children will not demonstrate this symptom in individual
therapy. But in a group these kinds of behavior will appear.
For adults with ADD, group therapy has several advantages. First
of all, it gives people a chance to meet and interact with other people
like themselves, people who have had to deal with many of the same
problems and frustrations in life.
Second, the members of the group can teach each other a great
deal. They can talk about their own experiences and share tips and
pointers that they have found helpful in their own lives while
learning similar information from other members of the group. In a
sense, the best therapist for someone with ADD is someone else with
ADD, someone who has been there, someone who knows the place
from the inside.
Third, a group can validate its members’ experiences in ways that
an individual therapist cannot. A group can understand its members
and give powerful support. The acceptance one can find in a group
can be uplifting.
Fourth, a group can supply a tremendous amount of energy.
Groups can be like reservoirs of fuel where members fill up each
week.

Third, a group can validate its members’ experiences in ways that
an individual therapist cannot. A group can understand its members
and give powerful support. The acceptance one can find in a group
can be uplifting.
Fourth, a group can supply a tremendous amount of energy.
Groups can be like reservoirs of fuel where members fill up each
week.

Fifth, as with groups for children who have ADD, adult groups can
re-create the very situations that people with ADD are trying to learn
how to cope with. Groups can re-create situations like Dave at the
water cooler. Groups create situations where its members must listen
to each other, wait their turn, where they must share, where they
must keep silent for a period of time, where they must stay put,
where they must take responsibility for what they say or do not say,
where they can hear feedback as to how they come across to others.
As the individual learns to bear with the tension of these feelings in
the group, that skill can be carried into the outside world.
Sixth, groups address the problem of disconnectedness. Many
people with ADD have trouble finding a place where they feel
connected, a part of something larger than self. Although people with
ADD tend to be outgoing and gregarious, they can also harbor strong
feelings of isolation, loneliness, and disconnectedness. Their stance
in life is often one of reaching out but not quite making contact, as if
running alongside a speeding train, trying to grasp the hand that is
being held out to them to help them on board. Groups can bring
people on board. Groups can provide a sense of belonging, a sense of
connectedness. Once on board, the individual can feel more a part of
things in other areas of his or her life.
To illustrate the power of group therapy in ADD, let me tell a story
from one of the groups I conduct. Some time ago I began to organize
groups for adults with ADD. I had never done this before, and I had
not read of others doing it, but for all the reasons given above, it
seemed to me a good idea. To start my first group I announced the
idea at a lecture I gave. From the people who signed up, I selected a
group of ten men and women, and we started to meet once a week.
I did not know what to expect. Colleagues I mentioned the idea to
rolled their eyes and said, “Ten people with ADD in a group?! How
can you run herd on that?” Another colleague asked, “Will they ever
show up on time?”

Not knowing what would happen, I sat in my office the evening of
the first meeting of the group. We were to meet from 7:00 to 8:15. By
7:15 not one of the ten members had appeared. I began to wonder if
my own ADD had led me to write down the wrong day. At 7:20 the
first member showed up. He burst into the office ready to apologize
for being late, but when he discovered he was the first to arrive, he
started laughing and said, “Well, what can you expect?” Seven people
eventually arrived for that first meeting. Three others left messages
saying they had gotten lost on their way to my office.
The ones who did find their way began the most remarkable group
I have ever participated in. They came together immediately, united
in their desire to find mutual understanding, to tell their various
stories, and to “be there” for each other.
I gave the group some basic guidelines: Try to be on time. Don’t
socialize with each other outside the group. If you are going to miss a

I have ever participated in. They came together immediately, united
in their desire to find mutual understanding, to tell their various
stories, and to “be there” for each other.
I gave the group some basic guidelines: Try to be on time. Don’t
socialize with each other outside the group. If you are going to miss a
session, try to let the group know about it in advance. We contracted
to meet for twenty weeks with an option to continue for another ten
weeks if people wanted to. I also called the members who had gotten
lost and gave them directions for the following week.
The next session all ten members showed up and on time. They
laughed about the trouble they’d had with directions the week before,
and started what became a regular practice in the group of giving
good-natured kidding as a way of dealing with the problems of ADD.
“It’s a miracle,” they laughed, “that we all got here this week, and on
time no less.” Their exuberance filled the room even before they
knew each other. It was as if, in some intuitive part of their minds,
they already knew each other and how important the group would
become. From the beginning they were ready for each other.
They began to tell their stories. One by one, not on cue but
spontaneously, tales of humor and tales of pain filled the room. They
looked around at each other, giving nods of approval and looks of
recognition as they would identify with one detail or another that

was being related. To be with them was to be with people who had
spent their whole lives feeling “different,” only now to discover in
each other that they were not alone. They laughed back tears, and
they faced each others’ pain with firsthand understanding, as they
told of misunderstandings, frustrations, and lost chances as well as
of tips and advice, tricks from the ADD trade.
I didn’t have to do a thing. If one member interrupted another
member, others would say something like, “Now don’t interrupt.
Since we all have ADD, we have to be really careful about paying
attention to each other.” They looked out for each other in this kind
of way during every session. I sat back and answered factual
questions about ADD now and then, but, by and large, the members
of the group did all the work. When I had to miss a few meetings
because of prior commitments, the group simply met in my office
without me. They asked only if I would bill them for sessions I
missed. I said of course not.
Within a few weeks the group had developed a powerful sense of
cohesion. One member, who was an aspiring actress, turned down a
part in a play because rehearsal time conflicted with group time.
Another member, who went on vacation, sent us a postcard.
Members gave each other permission to call each other in case of an
emotional crisis. I worried this might lead to subgrouping or
breakdowns in confidentiality. It never did.
When the option to continue the group for another ten weeks came
up, everyone wanted to go on. However, one member stated she
could not afford to. Later that week I received a letter without
signature or identifying marks. It contained, in cash, the fee for an
additional ten weeks of the group. The person who wrote the letter
identified him- or herself only as “a member of the adult ADD
group.”
Now I, who was trained in psychoanalytically oriented Boston, felt
racked by a dilemma. What should I do? Do I bring the money into

signature or identifying marks. It contained, in cash, the fee for an
additional ten weeks of the group. The person who wrote the letter
identified him- or herself only as “a member of the adult ADD
group.”
Now I, who was trained in psychoanalytically oriented Boston, felt
racked by a dilemma. What should I do? Do I bring the money into

the group? Give it back? To whom? What if the person who had said
she could not afford to continue had said that as a way of leaving the
group gracefully? Would this put undue pressure on her to continue?
What if others felt cheated that they couldn’t get a “scholarship”
also? What about the group’s curiosity as to the identity of the
anonymous donor? What about my own curiosity? With these
questions swimming through my mind, I called a colleague,
experienced in group work, for advice. He felt a bit perplexed as well,
but advised me to bring the matter up in the group and see how they
handled it.
At the next meeting of the group we decided to go on for ten more
weeks and then to stop. At that point I informed the group that I had
received an anonymous cash donation to cover the fee of the member
who could not afford to continue.
Well, thankfully, the group was not psychoanalytically trained.
Their response was to say how generous it was for someone to
donate the money, and then they moved on to other topics. I sat
there biting my tongue, thinking, Yes, but, don’t you want to know
more? Don’t you see the complicated dynamic issues involved here?
Shouldn’t we analyze the implications of this gift? Etc., etc. However,
I didn’t let myself make more of the matter than the group did, and
so the incident passed into the group’s history as this: the group
received a generous gift which allowed the group to remain intact for
ten more weeks. In retrospect, I do still have all those questions I had
originally. But most of all, I see the gift as evidence of just how
important it was to the members of the group to be together and, at
last, to be understood.

MEDICATION
The various medications that we now use in the treatment of
attention deficit disorder can dramatically improve the quality of an
individual’s life. Just as a pair of glasses help the nearsighted person
focus, so can medication help the person with ADD see the world
more clearly. When the medication is effective, the results can be
truly astonishing and life-changing. However, medication is no
panacea. It does not work for everybody who has ADD, and for those
it does help, it ameliorates but does not cure the syndrome. When
medication is used, it should be used only under medical
supervision, and it should be used only as part of a comprehensive
treatment program that includes a careful diagnostic evaluation;
education about ADD and associated learning problems; practical
suggestions as to how to restructure one’s life and manage one’s
moods; counseling, coaching, or psychotherapy; as well as family or
couple’s therapy as needed.
The following information on medication is intended to
supplement conversations with a physician or other counselor. You
should never take any medication until you feel you know all you
need to know and you feel comfortable with this course of treatment.
Before beginning a course of medication, you of course want to be
sure of the diagnosis. Then you must determine what the target
symptoms are so that you will have an objective way of assessing the

should never take any medication until you feel you know all you
need to know and you feel comfortable with this course of treatment.
Before beginning a course of medication, you of course want to be
sure of the diagnosis. Then you must determine what the target
symptoms are so that you will have an objective way of assessing the
efficacy of the medication. Typical target symptoms in ADD would
include: easy distractibility; inability to stay focused—for example,
on a task at work or reading a book, homework, or classroom
material; impulsive acts or words; difficulty maintaining attention
during a conversation; poor frustration tolerance; angry outbursts;
mood swings; difficulty getting organized; chronic procrastination;
difficulty prioritizing; tendency to worry rather than act; a subjective
inner feeling of noise or chaos; tendency to hop from topic to topic or
project to project; and other symptoms associated with ADD. It is
important to try to define these as concretely as possible.

Once you have an accurate diagnosis and have defined what the
target symptoms are, you may be ready to try medication to treat
those target symptoms.
Very often at the initial stage of treatment there is great reluctance
to try medication. Parents do not want to “drug” their child, or the
adult with ADD wants to make it on his own, without the aid of some
unknown medication. This hesitancy may be deeply felt and must be
dealt with carefully.
Children, particularly boys, often feel that taking medicine is like
admitting something scary is wrong with them, admitting they are
“retarded” or “crazy” or “stupid,” all labels they are struggling to
throw off. They also often feel that medication is a crutch they should
not need to use. They frequently feel embarrassed or humiliated in
taking the medication. It is essential that these feelings be explored
and dealt with gently and respectfully. It may take months, even
years, before a child—or adult—feels ready to give medication a try.
That is all right. The medication should not be given until the
individual is ready to take it. The decision to take medication should
never be unilateral and should not be a struggle; it should be
bilateral, emerging from a dialogue that lasts as long as it needs to.
Of course, no one is obliged ever to try medication. And no one
should try medication without wanting to do so and without a full
understanding of the risks and benefits involved. But what too often
happens is that one decides against medication without a full
understanding of what is involved. One decides against medication
on the basis of heresay, superstition, or gut feeling, not on the basis
of fact and science. There is a great deal of misinformation spread
around about the various medications used to treat ADD. It is
extraordinary the number of false rumors that swirl around Ritalin,
one of the chief medications used to treat ADD. “It will make you
crazy,” people whisper to one another. “I saw an article in the paper
that said Ritalin turned one man into a homicidal maniac.” “Ritalin
is just the schools’ way of lobotimizing children.” “Ritalin turns you

extraordinary the number of false rumors that swirl around Ritalin,
one of the chief medications used to treat ADD. “It will make you
crazy,” people whisper to one another. “I saw an article in the paper
that said Ritalin turned one man into a homicidal maniac.” “Ritalin
is just the schools’ way of lobotimizing children.” “Ritalin turns you

into a dwarf.” These tabloid-headline-type remarks are made all the
time. They are utterly untrue.
The fact is that when Ritalin and the other medications used in the
treatment of ADD are used properly, they are very safe indeed, and
can be as dramatically effective as the right pair of eyeglasses can be
for nearsightedness. But many people never get to the point where
they rationally weigh the evidence and make a decision based on the
facts. Instead, they abruptly decide against medication as if they
were casting a vote against sin and evil, and in so doing subject
themselves, or their children, to unnecessary pain and frustration. It
would be like the nearsighted person deciding that glasses were bad,
a kind of vice or unnecessary crutch, and that he should be able to
get by by squinting harder.
Although medication does not always work, when it does work, it
works wonders. To decide against it on an informed basis is fine, but
to decide against it for irrational reasons is a mistake. The
information that follows is offered in the hope that the decisionmaking is as informed as possible.
Not much has changed in the seventeen years since the original
publication of Driven to Distraction, not in medications for ADD
nor, for that matter, in all psychopharmacology. Finding new
effective medications for the brain has been a struggle, and we are
still waiting for the breakthrough drugs that will help with brainbased problems.
Today, as in the past, we have two main classes of medication that
are approved by the FDA in the treatment of ADD: the stimulants
and the antidepressants. The same medications are used in both
children and adults. For both children and adults with correctly
diagnosed ADD, some medication will be effective about 80 percent
of the time. Finding the right medication and the right dosage can
take several months of trial and error, as we still do not (as yet) have
a way of predicting what medication in what dosage will help a given

individual. It is worth being patient and not giving up too soon, as
often an increase in dosage or a change in medication will make a
dramatic difference.
When medication is effective, it can help the individual focus
better, sustain effort over a longer period of time, reduce anxiety and
frustration, reduce irritability and mood swings, increase efficiency
by enhancing concentration as well as reducing time lost in
distraction, and increase impulse control. These primary effects may
lead to secondary effects of increased confidence, sense of wellbeing, and self-esteem.
The medication does not always work, and even when it does work,
sometimes it must be discontinued due to intolerable side effects. In
these cases, the nonmedication forms of treatment can still produce
significant therapeutic gains.
First, let’s consider the stimulants, the most common of which is
Ritalin (generic name, methylphenidate). Each dose of short-acting
Ritalin lasts between two to four hours. Therefore, short-acting
Ritalin is given in divided doses throughout the day. The usual

these cases, the nonmedication forms of treatment can still produce
significant therapeutic gains.
First, let’s consider the stimulants, the most common of which is
Ritalin (generic name, methylphenidate). Each dose of short-acting
Ritalin lasts between two to four hours. Therefore, short-acting
Ritalin is given in divided doses throughout the day. The usual
dosing schedule is as follows: first dose with breakfast, second dose
four hours later or with lunch, and third dose about four or five
o’clock in the afternoon. This routine may be varied according to
one’s individual schedule. The main point is to have the medication
on board when you need to be focused, and to space each dose by
about four hours.
However, one big improvement in these medications has been the
recent development of effective long-acting forms. Before the
introduction of Concerta in 2000, the long-acting and generic
preparations of methylphenidate were not very useful. But
pharmaceutical companies have stepped up with better generic
varieties as well as true long-acting brands. There is Ritalin LA (a
better version of Ritalin SR), Methylin, Metadate, and a generic
methylphenidate that works much better than the older versions. We

also have Focalin and Focalin XR, which is the d-isomer of
methylphenidate and is a bit stronger and a bit longer lasting than
the traditional Ritalin.
These newer drugs are particularly helpful for children who might
often forget to take their noon dose or don’t want to be seen going to
the school nurse for medication. In the past, children who have had
this concern have been prescribed the slow-release forms of
methylphenidates, such as Concerta, Ritalin LA, Methylin, Ritalin
SR, or Metadate CD. These claim to last eight hours. However, in
many cases the slow-release forms do not work as long as they claim.
Dexedrine, another stimulant and a popular alternative to Ritalin,
has now shown up in multiple forms as treatment for ADD. Adderall
—the first of what I call “Old Drugs in New Bottles”—was renamed
from the drug Obetrol, one of the diet drugs of the 1960s, and has
made quite an impact on the field. It also comes in the form of an
effective long-acting Adderall XR. In addition, there is an effective
all-day preparation called Vyvanse, which is a purer form of
amphetamine than Adderall.
As their name implies, the stimulants act on neurotransmitters to
activate or stimulate the central nervous system. In ADD, this has the
effect of helping the individual to focus or attend more fully than
before. They also can have a mood-leveling effect.
A few things the stimulants do not do should be mentioned to clear
up common misconceptions. They do not “drug up” or cloud the
sensorium of the individual taking them. They are not addictive in
the doses prescribed for ADD. They do not always take away the
creativity or “special something” so many people with ADD possess.
However, there may be side effects. Using Ritalin as an example,
the most common side effects are appetite suppression and sleep
loss. Blood pressure may also be elevated. These side effects are
dose-related and may be avoided by lowering the dose. There may be

creativity or “special something” so many people with ADD possess.
However, there may be side effects. Using Ritalin as an example,
the most common side effects are appetite suppression and sleep
loss. Blood pressure may also be elevated. These side effects are
dose-related and may be avoided by lowering the dose. There may be

some nausea and headaches at the outset of therapy; these usually
pass within a few days. In addition, as the medication wears off, the
individual may feel a letdown or change of mood. One can usually
accommodate to this by changing the amount or timing of the dose.
One may also feel jittery or nervous on Ritalin, while still getting
therapeutic benefits. Sometimes the addition of a low dose of a
medication called a beta-blocker, such as nadolol, can remove this
jitteriness.
Other, far-less-frequent side effects of Ritalin include the
development of an involuntary muscle twitch, or what is called
Tourette’s Syndrome; growth suppression in children (for which
there is a compensatory spurt in growth when the medication is
discontinued); alteration in blood count or other blood chemistries
(which normalize upon discontinuation of the medication); or
feelings of jitteriness or general unpleasantness, which also pass
upon discontinuation of the medication. These side effects are very
rare. In general, Ritalin is an extremely safe medication when given
under proper supervision.
One can take generic preparations or the brand names. In our
experience the brand-name drugs work better than the generic
alternatives.
The therapeutic dose varies from individual to individual and does
so for every medication. A typical dose for Ritalin would be 10
milligrams (mg) three times a day. One usually starts at 5 mg twice a
day to see if the medication is going to be well tolerated. After a few
days it can be increased to 10 mg twice a day, then on to three times
a day. One can continue to increase the dose until either side effects
appear—appetite suppression or sleep loss or other side effects—or
until a therapeutic benefit is achieved and target symptoms are
relieved.
Sometimes the medication simply does not work no matter what
the dose. Other times one gives up too soon, not reaching a high-

enough dose to achieve a therapeutic effect. One can increase the
dose until side effects occur, but when side effects do occur the dose
should be lowered or the medication stopped. If the medication is
stopped, one can try another stimulant or another class of
medication. It should be borne in mind that if one stimulant does not
work, another stimulant may.
A common reason for the medication not to work is giving up too
soon on it. Often it takes weeks, even months, to find the right
dosage and the right dosing schedule. Sometimes a low dose will
work, but only if it is given at the right time. Sometimes a small
increase in dose will make a great difference. Sometimes the addition
of another medication will allow the first medication to work better.
This can be a tedious process, like trying on many pairs of shoes until
you find the right fit. But it is well worth the effort.
Often the person taking the medication will not be aware if it is
working. However, teachers, friends, spouse, or boss may notice
dramatic improvement in focusing and productivity. Therefore, the
assessment of efficacy should include reports from at least one other
person in addition to the person taking the medication. In children,

Often the person taking the medication will not be aware if it is
working. However, teachers, friends, spouse, or boss may notice
dramatic improvement in focusing and productivity. Therefore, the
assessment of efficacy should include reports from at least one other
person in addition to the person taking the medication. In children,
behavioral checklists filled out by the classroom teacher can be
particularly helpful. In adults, the assessment is somewhat less
formal, but it should be equally objective.
Of the antidepressants used to treat ADD, Strattera, Wellbutrin,
and Norpramin are the most commonly used. Strattera is the newest
of this group and has achieved much popularity, though it often has
the uncomfortable side effects of nausea and fatigue. Although they
are completely different substances, chemically, than the stimulants,
they often have a similar effect upon the target symptoms of ADD.
Sometimes, when a stimulant does not work, this group will, and vice
versa.
There are several advantages of antidepressants over Ritalin and
the other stimulants. First, they often can be given in a single daily

dosage, thus avoiding the need to remember to take a pill several
times a day. (Trying to remember to take medication for ADD brings
up a kind of Catch-22: How are you supposed to remember to take
the medication that is supposed to help you remember to take your
medication?) Second, they do not produce the jagged peaks and
valleys some people experience on Ritalin. They are often smoother,
evener in their action. Third, they are not controlled substances and
so there can be greater flexibility in prescribing.
Several other medications have been found to be helpful in
childhood and adult ADD. These include tricyclics such as Tofranil,
as well as other medications such as Clonidine, Cymbalta, Prozac,
and others. Therefore, if the stimulants or Strattera, Wellbutrin, and
Norpramin do not work, there are other medications one can try.
In addition, there are various medications that can be useful
adjunctively, either to treat side effects or to improve the effect of the
primary medication. We have already mentioned the usefulness of
the beta-blockers, specifically nadolol at a dose of 20 mg per day, to
treat the jitteriness or anxiety that is sometimes associated with the
stimulants, particularly Ritalin. Recently Intuniv, another old pill
with a new name—the former antihypertensive drug guanficine, or
Tenex—has also been approved for treatment of ADD medication
symptoms.
There are several other medications worth mentioning. Many
women who have ADD feel that their symptoms get much worse
when they are premenstrual. As one of our patients has commented,
“I do okay on the medication for most of the month … but when I’m
juggling twelve balls in the air to get something done, and then PMS
arrives, it makes it impossible to continue to function very well.”
No scientific evidence linking a proneness to PMS with ADD has
been offered. But many of our female patients report unusually
severe PMS symptoms. It might be a common accompanying
problem. It can restrict a woman’s attempts to deal with her ADD

arrives, it makes it impossible to continue to function very well.”
No scientific evidence linking a proneness to PMS with ADD has
been offered. But many of our female patients report unusually
severe PMS symptoms. It might be a common accompanying
problem. It can restrict a woman’s attempts to deal with her ADD

and can make any existing anxiety, depression, or mood swings
much worse. The addition of serotonin-active drugs like buspirone,
fluoxetine, or sertraline (BuSpar, Prozac, or Zoloft) to the treatment
regimen can make a great difference to the woman with ADD. These
medications can alleviate the typical PMS symptoms and re-regulate
the neuroendocrine imbalance wreaking havoc on an already
unbalanced system.
If depression coexists with ADD, as it often does, antidepressant
medication can be quite helpful, in addition to the medication for
ADD. Ritalin, by itself, has a mildly antidepressant effect. The
addition of Norpramin, or one of the serotonin-active medications
such as Prozac or Zoloft can help treat the depressive symptoms
while the stimulant treats the symptoms of ADD. One should not
usually start the antidepressant at the same time one starts the
stimulant. This is because the individual’s depression often
disappears as the symptoms of ADD go away. However, if the
depression persists, an antidepressant medication may help.
Rage outbursts, tantrums, and even violent behavior sometimes
accompany ADD. There are a variety of medications that can treat
these symptoms. The mood-stabilizing medications lithium, valproic
acid (Depakote), and carbamazepine (Tegretol) all may help control
these outbursts. The beta-blockers nadolol (Corgard) and
propranolol (Inderal) can also reduce explosiveness.
If obsessive-compulsive disorder occurs with ADD, the addition of
clomipramine (Anafranil) can treat the obsessional symptoms.
The medications used in the treatment of ADD are summarized in
the following table:

There are emotional issues that underlie the taking of medication,
particularly in children, but in adults as well. Many people recoil at
the thought of taking medication for their brains, or their children’s
brains. It conjures up images of thought control or serious mental
illness. It is important to discuss these fears or preconceptions as
openly as possible.
The taking of medication for ADD should not be an act of faith but
an act of science. Sometimes people ask, “Do you believe in

medication as part of the treatment of ADD?” as if medication were a
religious principle. We neither believe in it nor disbelieve in it for all
people. Rather, we approach it rationally. For most people who have
ADD, medication has proven to be extremely useful. For some it has
proven to be ineffective. For a very few it has proven to be harmful. If
the diagnosis of ADD is carefully made, the best research data we
have states that a trial of medication is indicated. However, it might
not work.
Before starting the medication it is useful to explore all one’s
feelings about it, in addition to getting as much scientific information
about it as possible. There are many misconceptions and much
misinformation about the medications involved in treating ADD.
A few last points about medication must be stressed. Medication is
not the whole treatment for ADD. It is a useful and powerful adjunct,
but it should never be regarded as the complete treatment.
Medication should always be monitored by a physician. One should

misinformation about the medications involved in treating ADD.
A few last points about medication must be stressed. Medication is
not the whole treatment for ADD. It is a useful and powerful adjunct,
but it should never be regarded as the complete treatment.
Medication should always be monitored by a physician. One should
never take medication without feeling comfortable doing so. Spend
time preparing yourself to take the medication—talking about it,
getting questions answered—before you start, and your chances of
success will be greatly improved.

Practical Tips on the Management and Treatment of ADD
This section offers short, encapsulated bits of advice on how to deal
with ADD, practical tips that aim to assist in the day-to-day coping
with life with ADD. These tips are culled from our years of
experience in working with individuals with ADD, hearing their
problems and complaints, and learning from the solutions they
devised.
As you read through the following suggestions, you will probably
find that you use many of them already; you will find that some of
them are obvious or apply to everybody, with or without ADD; you
will find that some of them seem irrelevant to your situation; and you
will find, we hope, that some of them are new and quite helpful.
A word of caution should be added. Often when people read these
tips for the first time, they become excited about incorporating them
into their lives right away. After an initial burst of enthusiasm and
improvement, however, they find that the old habits associated with
their ADD start to creep back into their lives, and they find that the
tips, although “correct,” are hard to follow consistently. As one
patient said, “If I could follow the tips, then I wouldn’t need to follow
them, because I wouldn’t have ADD in the first place.” Or as another
patient said, “I have my days when I can follow the tips and days
when I can’t. It’s like the old heartbeat, up and down.”
It is important, therefore, to keep in mind that the tips are only
one part of a treatment program. Very few people with ADD can
implement these tips consistently on their own. They need help,
either from what we call a “coach,” or from a group, or from a
therapist, or from some other external source. Do not feel
intimidated or disheartened if at first you have trouble putting all
these tips to work for you in your life. It will take time, it will require
hard work, and it will require encouragement (and forgiveness) from
the outside world. But with these considerations in mind, the tips
can offer solid, practical help.

FIFTY TIPS ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ADULT ATTENTION DEFICIT
DISORDER
INSIGHT AND EDUCATION
1. Be sure of the diagnosis. Make sure you’re working with a
professional who really understands ADD and has excluded
related or similar conditions, such as anxiety states, agitated
depression, hyperthyroidism, manic-depressive illness, or
obsessive-compulsive disorder.
2. Educate yourself. Perhaps the single most powerful
treatment for ADD is understanding ADD in the first place.
Read books. Talk with professionals. Talk with other adults
who have ADD. These may be found through ADD support
groups or local or national ADD organizations like CHADD.
You’ll be able to design your own treatment to fit your own
version of ADD.
3. Choose a coach. It is useful for you to have a coach or some
person near to you to keep after you, but always with humor.

who have ADD. These may be found through ADD support
groups or local or national ADD organizations like CHADD.
You’ll be able to design your own treatment to fit your own
version of ADD.
3. Choose a coach. It is useful for you to have a coach or some
person near to you to keep after you, but always with humor.
Your coach can help you get organized, stay on task, give you
encouragement, or remind you to get back to work. Friend,
colleague, or therapist (it is possible, but risky, for your coach
to be your spouse), a coach is someone who stays on you to get
things done, exhorts you as coaches do, keeps tabs on you,
and in general stands in your corner. A coach can be
tremendously helpful in treating ADD.
4. Seek encouragement. ADD adults need lots of
encouragement. This is in part due to many self-doubts that
have accumulated over the years. But it goes beyond that.
More than most people, ADD adults wither without
encouragement and thrive when given it. They will often work
for another person in a way they won’t work for themselves.

This is not “bad,” it just is. It should be recognized and taken
advantage of.
5. Realize what ADD is not—i.e., conflict with mother,
unconscious fear of success, passive-aggressive personality,
etc. People with ADD, of course, may have a conflict with their
mother or an unconscious fear of success or have a passiveaggressive personality, but it is important to separate the ADD
from these other kinds of problems because the treatment for
ADD is completely different.
6. Educate and involve others. Just as it is key for you to
understand ADD, it is equally if not more important for those
around you to understand it—family, job, school, friends.
Once they get the concept, they will be able to understand you
much better and to help you reach your goals.
7. Give up guilt over high-stimulus-seeking behavior.
Understand that you are drawn to intense stimuli. Try to
choose them wisely, rather than brooding over the “bad” ones.
8. Listen to feedback from trusted others. Adults (and
children, too) with ADD are notoriously poor self-observers.
They use a lot of what can appear to be denial.
9. Consider joining or starting a support group. Much of the
most useful information about ADD has not yet found its way
into books but remains stored in the minds of the people who
have ADD. In groups this information can come out. Plus,
groups are really helpful in giving the kind of support that is
so badly needed.
10. Try to get rid of the negativity that may have infested your
system if you have lived for years without knowing that what
you had was ADD. A good psychotherapist may help in this
regard.

11. Don’t feel chained to conventional careers or conventional
ways of coping. Give yourself permission to be yourself. Give
up trying to be the person you always thought you should be—
the model student or the organized executive, for example—
and let yourself be who you are.
12. Remember that what you have is a neurological condition.
It is genetically transmitted. It is caused by biology, by how
your brain is wired. It is not a disease of the will, nor a moral
failing, nor some kind of neurosis. It is not caused by a
weakness in character, nor by a failure to mature. Its cure is
not to be found in the power of the will, nor in punishment,
nor in sacrifice, nor in pain. Always remember this. Try as
they might, many people with ADD have great trouble

your brain is wired. It is not a disease of the will, nor a moral
failing, nor some kind of neurosis. It is not caused by a
weakness in character, nor by a failure to mature. Its cure is
not to be found in the power of the will, nor in punishment,
nor in sacrifice, nor in pain. Always remember this. Try as
they might, many people with ADD have great trouble
accepting the syndrome as being rooted in biology rather than
weakness of character.
13. Try to help others with ADD. You’ll learn a lot about the
condition in the process, as well as feel good to boot.
PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT
14. Establish external structure. Structure is the hallmark of
the nonpharmacological treatment of the ADD child. It can be
equally useful with adults. Once in place, structure works like
the walls of the bobsled slide, keeping the speedball sled from
careening off the track. Make frequent use of lists, notes to
self, color coding, rituals, reminders, files. Also use pattern
planning, as described earlier.
15. Use pizzazz. Try to make your environment as peppy as
you want it to be without letting it boil over. If your
organization system can be stimulating (imagine that!),

instead of boring, then you will be more likely to follow it. For
example, in setting things up, try color coding. Mentioned
above, color coding deserves emphasis. Many people with
ADD are visually oriented. Take advantage of this by making
things memorable with color: files, memoranda, texts,
schedules, etc. Virtually anything in the black-and-white of
type can be made more memorable, arresting, and therefore
attention-getting with color.
16. When it comes to paperwork, use the principle of O.H.I.O:
Only Handle It Once. When you receive a document or a
memo or any kind of written material, try to only handle it
once. Either respond to it right away, on the spot, or throw the
document away, or file it permanently. Do not put it in a TO DO
box or pile. For people with ADD, TO DO piles might just as
well be called NEVER DONE piles. They serve as little menaces
around one’s desk or room, silently building guilt, anxiety,
and resentment, as well as taking up a lot of space. Get in the
habit of acting immediately on your paperwork. Make the
wrenching decision to throw something away. Or, overcome
inertia and respond to it on the spot. Whatever you do with
the document, whenever possible, only handle it once.
17. Set up your environment to reward rather than deflate. To
understand what a deflating environment is, most adult
ADDers only need to think back to school. Now that you have
the freedom of adulthood, try to set things up so that you will
not constantly be reminded of your limitations.
18. Acknowledge and anticipate the inevitable collapse of X
percent of projects undertaken, relationships entered into,
obligations incurred. Better that you anticipate these
“failures” rather than be surprised by them and brood over
them. Think of them as part of the cost of doing business.

not constantly be reminded of your limitations.
18. Acknowledge and anticipate the inevitable collapse of X
percent of projects undertaken, relationships entered into,
obligations incurred. Better that you anticipate these
“failures” rather than be surprised by them and brood over
them. Think of them as part of the cost of doing business.

19. Embrace challenges. ADD people thrive with many
challenges. As long as you know they won’t all pan out, as long
as you don’t get too perfectionistic and fussy, you’ll get a lot
done and stay out of trouble. Far better that you be too busy
than not busy enough. As the old saying goes, if you want to
get something done, ask a busy person.
20. Make deadlines.
21. Break down large tasks into small ones. Attach deadlines
to the small parts. Then, like magic, the large task will get
done. This is one of the simplest and most powerful of all
structuring devices. Often a large task will feel overwhelming
to the person with ADD. The mere thought of trying to
perform the task makes one turn away. On the other hand, if
the large task is broken down into small parts, each
component may feel quite manageable. (For example, it was
only by using this technique that we managed to write this
book.)
22. Prioritize rather than procrastinate. If you cannot handle
it only once (tip 16), then be sure to prioritize. When things
get busy, the adult ADD person loses perspective: paying an
unpaid parking ticket can feel as pressing as putting out the
fire that just got started in the wastebasket. Sometimes one
becomes paralyzed. Prioritize. Take a deep breath. Put first
things first. Then go on to the second and the third task. Don’t
stop. Procrastination is one of the hallmarks of adult ADD.
You have to really discipline yourself to watch out for it and
avoid it.
23. Accept the fear of things going too well. Accept edginess
when things are too easy, when there’s no conflict. Don’t gum
things up just to make them more stimulating.

24. Notice how and where you work best: in a noisy room, on
the train, wrapped in three blankets, listening to music,
whatever. Children and adults with ADD can do their best
under rather odd conditions. Let yourself work under
whatever conditions are best for you.
25. Know that it is OK to do two things at once: carry on a
conversation and knit, or take a shower and do your best
thinking, or jog and plan a business meeting. Often people
with ADD need to be doing several things at once in order to
get anything done at all.
26. Do what you’re good at. Again, if it seems easy, that is OK.
There is no rule that says you can only do what you’re bad at.
27. Leave time between engagements to gather your thoughts.
Transitions are difficult for ADDers, and minibreaks can help
ease the transition.
28. Keep a notepad in your car, by your bed, and in your
pocketbook or jacket. You never know when a good idea will
hit you, or you’ll want to remember something else.
29. Read with a pen in hand, not only for marginal notes or
underlining, but for the inevitable cascade of “other” thoughts
that will occur to you.
MOOD MANAGEMENT
30. Have structured “blow-out” time. Set aside some time in
every week for just letting go. Whatever you like to do—
blasting yourself with loud music, taking a trip to the
racetrack, having a feast—pick some kind of activity from time
to time where you can let loose in a safe way.

MOOD MANAGEMENT
30. Have structured “blow-out” time. Set aside some time in
every week for just letting go. Whatever you like to do—
blasting yourself with loud music, taking a trip to the
racetrack, having a feast—pick some kind of activity from time
to time where you can let loose in a safe way.

31. Recharge your batteries. Related to number 30, most
adults with ADD need, on a daily basis, some time to waste
without feeling guilty about it. One guilt-free way to
conceptualize it is to call it time to recharge your batteries.
Take a nap, watch TV, meditate. Something calm, restful, at
ease.
32. Choose “good,” helpful addictions, such as exercise. Many
adults with ADD have an addictive or compulsive personality
such that they are always hooked on something. Try to make
this something positive.
33. Understand mood changes and ways to manage these.
Know that your moods will change willy-nilly, independent of
what’s going on in the external world. Don’t waste your time
looking for someone to blame. Focus rather on learning to
tolerate a bad mood, knowing that it will pass, and learning
strategies to make it pass sooner. Change sets, i.e., get
involved with some new activity (preferably interactive), such
as a conversation with a friend, or a tennis game, or reading a
book.
34. Related to number 33, recognize the following cycle,
which is very common among adults with ADD:
a. Something “startles” your psychological system, a change
or transition, a disappointment or even a success. The
precipitant may be quite trivial, nothing more than an
everyday event.
b. This “startle” is followed by a minipanic with a sudden
loss of perspective, the world being set topsy-turvy.
c. You try to deal with this panic by falling into a mode of
obsessing and ruminating over one or another aspect of the
situation. This can last for hours, days, even months.

To break the negative obsessing, have a list of friends to
call. Have a few videos that always engross you and get your
mind off things. Have ready access to exercise. Have a
punching bag or pillow handy if there’s extra angry energy.
Rehearse a few pep talks you can give yourself, like, “You’ve
been here before. These are the ADD blues. They will soon
pass. You are OK.”
35. Learn how to name your feelings. Many people with ADD,
particularly men, get frustrated and angry because they
cannot put their feelings into words. With practice and
coaching, this is a skill that can be learned.
36. Expect depression after success. People with ADD
commonly complain of feeling depressed, paradoxically, after
a big success. This is because the high stimulus of the chase or
the challenge or the preparation is over. The deed is done.
Win or lose, the adult with ADD misses the conflict, the high
stimulus, and feels depressed.
37. Learn symbols, slogans, sayings as shorthand ways of
labeling and quickly putting into perspective slip-ups,
mistakes, or mood swings. When you turn left instead of right
and take your family on a twenty-minute detour, it is better to
be able to say, “There goes my ADD again,” than to have a sixhour fight over your unconscious desire to sabotage the whole
trip. These are not excuses. You still have to take
responsibility for your actions. It is just good to know where
your actions are coming from and where they’re not.
38. Use “time-outs,” as with children. When you are upset or
overstimulated, take a time-out. Go away. Calm down.

be able to say, “There goes my ADD again,” than to have a sixhour fight over your unconscious desire to sabotage the whole
trip. These are not excuses. You still have to take
responsibility for your actions. It is just good to know where
your actions are coming from and where they’re not.
38. Use “time-outs,” as with children. When you are upset or
overstimulated, take a time-out. Go away. Calm down.
39. Learn how to advocate for yourself. Adults with ADD are
so used to being criticized, they are often unnecessarily

defensive in putting their own case forward. Learn to get off
the defensive.
40. Avoid premature closure of a project, a conflict, a deal, or
a conversation. Don’t “cut to the chase” too soon, even though
you’re itching to.
41. Try to let a successful moment last and be remembered
and become sustaining over time. You’ll have to train yourself
consciously and deliberately to do this because you’ll naturally
tend to forget your successes as you brood over your
shortcomings or pessimistically anticipate the worst.
42. Remember that ADD usually includes a tendency to
overfocus or hyperfocus at times. This hyperfocusing can be
used constructively or destructively. Be aware of its
destructive use: a tendency to obsess or ruminate over some
imagined problem without being able to let it go.
43. Exercise vigorously and regularly. You should schedule
exercise into your life and stick with it. It helps you work off
excess energy and aggression in a positive way, it allows for
noise reduction within the mind, it stimulates the hormonal
and neurochemical system in a most therapeutic way, and it
soothes and calms the body. When you add all that to the wellknown health benefits of exercise, you can see how important
exercise is. Make it something fun so you can stick with it over
the long haul, i.e., the rest of your life. One particular form of
exercise, sexual activity, is very good for ADD.
INTERPERSONAL LIFE
44. Make a good choice in a significant other. Obviously, this
is good advice for anyone. But it is striking how the adult with

ADD can thrive or flounder depending on the choice of mate.
45. Learn to joke with yourself and others about your various
symptoms, from forgetfulness to getting lost all the time to
being tactless or impulsive. If you can bring a sense of humor
to your failings, others will forgive you much more quickly.
46. Schedule activities with friends. Adhere to these schedules
faithfully. It is crucial for you to keep connected to other
people.
47. Find and join groups where you are liked, appreciated,
understood, enjoyed. Even more than most people, people
with ADD take great strength from group support.
48. Don’t stay too long where you aren’t understood or
appreciated. Just as people with ADD gain a great deal from
supportive groups, they are particularly drained and
demoralized by negative groups, and they have a tendency to
stay with them too long, vainly trying to make things work
out, even when all the evidence shows they can’t.
49. Pay compliments. Notice other people. In general, get
social training if you’re having trouble getting along with
people.
50. Set social deadlines. Without deadlines and dates your
social life can atrophy. Just as you will be helped by
structuring your business week, so, too, you will benefit from
keeping your social calendar organized. This will help you stay
in touch with friends and get the kind of social support you

50. Set social deadlines. Without deadlines and dates your
social life can atrophy. Just as you will be helped by
structuring your business week, so, too, you will benefit from
keeping your social calendar organized. This will help you stay
in touch with friends and get the kind of social support you
need.
While the tips above refer to treatment in adults, they are also
applicable to children and adolescents in many instances. However,
there is an important area the tips do not touch upon in the

treatment of children, namely the classroom management of ADD.
For children with ADD to do well, it is imperative that their teacher
understand what ADD is and know how to work with these children
in the classroom. The classroom experience can make or break the
self-esteem, as well as the intellectual foundation, of children with
ADD.
To assist in the classroom, we offer fifty tips written for ADD
children in school. Since these tips were written explicitly for the
classroom teacher, you may find it useful to share them with your
child’s school.
Teachers recognize what many professionals do not: that there is
no one syndrome of ADD, but many; that ADD rarely occurs in
“pure” form by itself, but rather usually shows up entangled with
several other problems, such as learning disabilities or mood
problems; that the face of ADD changes with the weather, that it’s
inconstant and unpredictable; and that the treatment for ADD,
despite what may be serenely elucidated in various texts, remains a
task of hard work and devotion. The effectiveness of any treatment
for this disorder at school depends upon the knowledge and the
persistence of the school and the individual teacher.
The following suggestions are intended for teachers of children of
all ages. Some suggestions will be obviously more appropriate for
younger children, others for older, but the unifying themes of
structure, education, and encouragement pertain to all.

FIFTY TIPS ON THE CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT OF ADD
1. First of all, make sure what you are dealing with really is
ADD. It is definitely not up to the teacher to diagnose ADD,
but you can and should raise questions. Specifically, make
sure someone has tested the child’s hearing and vision
recently, and make sure other medical problems have been
ruled out. Make sure an adequate evaluation has been done.
Keep questioning until you are convinced. The responsibility
for seeing to all of this is the parents’, not the teacher’s, but
the teacher can support the process.
2. Build your support. Being a teacher in a classroom where
there are two or three kids with ADD can be extremely tiring.
Seek the support of the school and the parents. Find a
knowledgeable person with whom you can consult when you
have a problem. (Learning specialist, child psychiatrist, social
worker, school psychologist, pediatrician—the person’s degree
doesn’t really matter; what matters is that he or she knows
much about ADD, has seen many children with ADD, knows
his or her way around a classroom, and can speak plainly).
Keep in touch with the parents to ensure you are working
toward the same goals. Call on your colleagues for help.
3. Know your limits. Don’t be afraid to ask for help. You, as a
teacher, cannot be expected to be an expert on ADD. You
should feel comfortable in asking for help when you feel you
need it.
4. Ask the child what will help. Children with ADD are often

toward the same goals. Call on your colleagues for help.
3. Know your limits. Don’t be afraid to ask for help. You, as a
teacher, cannot be expected to be an expert on ADD. You
should feel comfortable in asking for help when you feel you
need it.
4. Ask the child what will help. Children with ADD are often
very intuitive. They can tell you how they can learn best, if you
ask them. They are often too embarrassed to volunteer the
information because it can be rather eccentric. But try to sit
down with the child individually and ask how he or she learns
best. The most insightful “expert” on how the child learns best
is often the child himself or herself. It is amazing how often
their opinions are ignored or not asked for. In addition,

especially with older children, make sure the child
understands what ADD is. This will help both of you.
5. Remember the emotional part of learning. These children
need special help in finding enjoyment in the classroom,
mastery instead of failure and frustration, excitement instead
of boredom or fear. It is essential to pay attention to the
emotions involved in the learning process.
6. Remember that ADD kids need structure. They need their
environment to structure externally what they can’t structure
internally on their own. Make lists. Children with ADD benefit
greatly from having a table or list to refer back to when they
get lost in what they’re doing.
They need reminders. They need previews. They need
repetition. They need direction. They need limits. They need
structure.
7. Post rules. Have them written down and in full view. The
children will be reassured by knowing what is expected of
them.
8. Repeat directions. Write down directions. Speak directions.
Repeat directions. People with ADD need to hear things more
than once.
9. Make frequent eye contact. You can “bring back” an ADD
child with eye contact. Do it often. A glance can retrieve a
child from a daydream or give permission to ask a question or
just give silent reassurance.
10. Seat the ADD child near your desk or wherever you are
most of the time. This helps stave off the drifting away that so
bedevils these children.

11. Set limits, boundaries. This is containing and soothing, not
punitive. Do it consistently, predictably, promptly, and
plainly. Don’t get into complicated, lawyerlike discussions of
fairness. These long discussions are just a diversion. Take
charge.
12. Have as predictable a schedule as possible. Post it on the
blackboard or the child’s desk. Refer to it often. If you are
going to vary it, as most interesting teachers do, give lots of
warning and preparation. Transitions and unannounced
changes are very difficult for these children. They become
discombobulated by them. Take special care to prepare for
transitions well in advance. Announce what is going to
happen, then give repeat reminders as the time approaches.
13. Try to help the children make their own schedules for after
school in an effort to avoid one of the hallmarks of ADD:
procrastination.
14. Eliminate, or reduce the frequency of, timed tests. There is
no great educational value to timed tests, and they definitely
do not allow many children with ADD to show what they
know.
15. Allow for escape-valve outlets such as leaving class for a
moment. If this can be built into the rules of the classroom, it
will allow the child to leave the room rather than “lose it,” and
in so doing begin to learn important tools of self-observation

do not allow many children with ADD to show what they
know.
15. Allow for escape-valve outlets such as leaving class for a
moment. If this can be built into the rules of the classroom, it
will allow the child to leave the room rather than “lose it,” and
in so doing begin to learn important tools of self-observation
and self-modulation.
16. Go for quality rather than quantity of homework. Children
with ADD often need a reduced load. As long as they are
learning the concepts, they should be allowed this. They will
put in the same amount of study time, just not get buried
under more than they can handle.

17. Monitor progress often. Children with ADD benefit greatly
from frequent feedback. It helps keep them on track, lets them
know what is expected of them and if they are meeting their
goals, and can be very encouraging.
18. Break down large tasks into small tasks. This is one of the
most crucial of all teaching techniques for children with ADD.
Large tasks quickly overwhelm the child, and he recoils with
an emotional “I’ll-never-be-able-to-do-that” kind of response.
By breaking down the task into manageable parts, each
component looking small enough to be doable, the child can
sidestep the emotion of being overwhelmed. In general, these
kids can do a lot more than they think they can. By breaking
tasks down, the teacher can let the child prove this to himself
or herself. With small children this can be extremely helpful in
avoiding tantrums born of anticipatory frustration. And with
older children it can help them avoid the defeatist attitude
that so often gets in their way.
19. Let yourself be playful, have fun, be unconventional, be
flamboyant. People with ADD love play. They respond to it
with enthusiasm. It helps focus attention—the kids’ attention
and yours as well. So much of their “treatment” involves
boring stuff like structure, schedules, lists, and rules, you will
want to show them that those things do not have to go hand in
hand with being a boring person, a boring teacher, or running
a boring classroom. Every once in a while, if you can let
yourself be a little bit silly, that will help a lot.
20. Still again, watch out for overstimulation. Like a pot on
the fire, ADD can boil over. You need to be able to reduce the
heat in a hurry.
21. Seek out and underscore success as much as possible.
These kids live with so much failure, they need all the positive
handling they can get. This point cannot be overemphasized:

these children need and benefit from praise. They love
encouragement. They drink it up and grow from it. And
without it they shrink and wither. Often the most devastating
aspect of ADD is not the ADD itself, but the secondary damage
done to self-esteem. So water these children well with
encouragement and praise.
22. Memory is often a problem with these kids. Teach them
little tricks like mnemonics, flash cards, etc. They often have
problems with what Dr. Mel Levine, a developmental
pediatrician and one of the great figures in the field of
learning problems, calls “active working memory,” the space
available on your mind’s table, so to speak. Any little tricks
you can devise—cues, rhymes, codes, and the like—can help a
great deal to enhance memory.
23. Use outlines. Teach outlining. Teach underlining. These
techniques do not come easily to children with ADD, but once
they learn them, the techniques can help a great deal in that

available on your mind’s table, so to speak. Any little tricks
you can devise—cues, rhymes, codes, and the like—can help a
great deal to enhance memory.
23. Use outlines. Teach outlining. Teach underlining. These
techniques do not come easily to children with ADD, but once
they learn them, the techniques can help a great deal in that
they structure and shape what is being learned as it is being
learned. This helps give the child a sense of mastery during
the learning process, when he or she needs it most, rather
than the dim sense of futility that is so often the defining
emotion of these kids’ learning process.
24. Announce what you are going to say before you say it. Say
it. Then say what you have said. Since many ADD children
learn better visually than by voice, if you can write what you’re
going to say as well as say it, that can be most helpful. This
kind of structuring glues the ideas in place.
25. Simplify instructions. Simplify choices. Simplify
scheduling. The simpler the verbiage the more likely it will be
comprehended. And use colorful language. Like color-coding,
colorful language keeps attention.

26. Use feedback that helps the child become self-observant.
Children with ADD tend to be poor self-observers. They often
have no idea how they come across or how they have been
behaving. Try to give them this information in a constructive
way. Ask questions like, “Do you know what you just did?” or
“How do you think you might have said that differently?” or
“Why do you think that other girl looked sad when you said
what you said?” Ask questions that promote self-observation.
27. Make expectations explicit.
28. A point system is a possibility as part of behavioral
modification or a reward system for younger children.
Children with ADD respond well to rewards and incentives.
Many are little entrepreneurs.
29. If the child has trouble reading social cues—body
language, tone of voice, timing, and the like—try discreetly to
offer specific and explicit advice as a sort of social coaching.
For example, say, “Before you tell your story, ask to hear the
other person’s first,” or, “Look at the other person when he’s
talking.” Many children with ADD are viewed as indifferent or
selfish, when in fact they just haven’t learned how to interact.
This skill does not come naturally to all children, but it can be
taught or coached.
30. Teach test-taking skills.
31. Make a game out of things. Motivation improves ADD.
32. Separate pairs and trios, whole clusters even, that don’t do
well together. You might have to try many arrangements.
33. Pay attention to connectedness. These kids need to feel
engaged, connected. As long as they are engaged, they will feel
motivated and be less likely to tune out.

34. Give responsibility back to the child when possible. Let
him devise his own method for remembering what to put into
his bookbag, or let him ask you for help rather than your
telling him he needs it.
35. Try a home-to-school-to-home notebook. This can really
help with the day-to-day parent-teacher communication and
avoid the crisis meetings. It also helps with the frequent
feedback these kids need.
36. Try to use daily progress reports. These may be given to
the child to hand on to his parents, or if the child is older, read
directly to the child. These are not intended as disciplinary,
but rather as informative, and encouraging.
37. Physical devices such as timers and buzzers can help with

feedback these kids need.
36. Try to use daily progress reports. These may be given to
the child to hand on to his parents, or if the child is older, read
directly to the child. These are not intended as disciplinary,
but rather as informative, and encouraging.
37. Physical devices such as timers and buzzers can help with
self-monitoring. For example, if a child cannot remember
when to take his or her medication, a wrist alarm can help,
rather than transferring responsibility to the teacher. Or
during study time, a timer placed on his desk can help the
child know exactly where the time is going.
38. Prepare for unstructured time. These kids need to know in
advance what is going to happen so they can prepare for it
internally. If they suddenly are given unstructured time, it can
be overstimulating.
39. Praise, stroke, approve, encourage, nourish.
40. With older children, suggest that they write little notes to
themselves to remind them of their questions about what is
being taught. In essence, they can take notes not only on what
is being said to them, but what they are thinking as well. This
will help them listen more effectively.
41. Handwriting is difficult for many of these children.
Consider developing alternatives. Suggest learning how to

type. Consider giving some tests orally.
42. Be like the conductor of a symphony. Get the orchestra’s
attention before beginning. (You may use silence, or the
tapping of your baton, to do this.) Keep the class “in time,”
pointing to different parts of the room as you need their help.
43. When possible, arrange for students to have a “study
buddy” in each subject, with phone number (adapted from
Gary Smith, who has written an excellent series of suggestions
on classroom management).
44. To avoid stigma, explain to the rest of the class and
normalize the treatment the child receives.
45. Meet with parents often. Avoid the pattern of meeting
only when there are problems or crises.
46. Encourage reading aloud at home. Read aloud in class as
much as possible. Use storytelling. Help the child build the
skill of staying on one topic.
47. Repeat, repeat, repeat.
48. Encourage physical exercise. One of the best treatments
for ADD, in both children and adults, is exercise, preferably
vigorous exercise. Exercise helps work off excess energy, it
helps focus attention, and it stimulates certain hormones and
neurochemicals that are beneficial, and it is fun. Make sure
the exercise is fun, so the child will continue to do it for the
rest of his or her life. John wrote a best-selling book called
Spark: The Revolutionary New Science of Exercise and the
Brain in 2008, and has devoted a whole chapter in this book
to talking about the benefits of exercise and how it acts very
similarly to our stimulant medication.

49. With older children, stress preparation prior to coming
into class. The better idea the child has of what will be
discussed on any given day, the more likely the material will
be mastered in class.
50. Always be on the lookout for sparkling moments. These
kids are far more talented and gifted than they often seem.
They are full of creativity, play, spontaneity, and good cheer.
They tend to be resilient, always bouncing back. They tend to
be generous of spirit, and glad to help out. They usually have a
“special something” that enhances whatever setting they’re in.
Remember, there is a melody inside that cacophony, a

They are full of creativity, play, spontaneity, and good cheer.
They tend to be resilient, always bouncing back. They tend to
be generous of spirit, and glad to help out. They usually have a
“special something” that enhances whatever setting they’re in.
Remember, there is a melody inside that cacophony, a
symphony yet to be written.

Common Problems in the Treatment of ADD
The treatment of ADD varies considerably from person to person.
Depending on the severity and complexity of the situation, the
treatment may last from a few sessions to several years. Sometimes
the treatment consists just in making the diagnosis and providing
some education. Sometimes the treatment becomes very involved,
requiring years of individual and family therapy, various
medications, and much persistence and patience. Sometimes there is
spectacular improvement; sometimes the change is so slow that it is
difficult to recognize. There is no one recipe for the treatment of
ADD. Each case presents its own problems and requires its own
solutions. But there are general principles one can follow, and they
have been outlined in this chapter.
In addition, there are particular obstacles one encounters
frequently in the treatment of ADD. What follows is an analysis of
ten of the most common.
1. Certain key individuals in the person’s life—teacher, parent,
spouse, employer, friend—do not accept the diagnosis of ADD.
They do not “believe in” ADD, and they do not want to talk about
it. It almost seems to go against their religion or core ethics. They
make the person with ADD feel like a fraud or a faker. Such a
disbelieving response can undermine both the hope that begins with
the diagnosis and the treatment. One often hears variations on the
theme of “There’s no such thing as ADD. It’s just an excuse for being
lazy. Put your energy into buckling down and working harder instead
of pursuing bogus diagnoses.”
Dealing with this response can be tricky. It is best that the
individual with ADD not take the chief responsibility for handling it,
because that usually leads to a struggle. It is wiser for the
professional making the diagnosis to address whatever skepticism or
disbelief may arise among those involved with his patient—be they
extended family, spouse, teacher, employer, or friend.

The name of the game is education. Give the people the facts. Stay
with the facts, confronting superstition, rumor, hearsay, prejudice,
and misinformation with fact. Try to avoid inflammatory debate.
Often those objecting to the diagnosis will be using their objections
to conceal an emotional agenda. They may be angry with the person
being diagnosed. They may resent him for all his past sins, and they
don’t want to see him get off with just a diagnosis. They want
punishment. So they will grow angry at the notion of ADD, and try to
discredit it. At these moments it is best to stay with the science, to
stay with the facts we have about ADD. At some point one may need
to address the angry feelings for what they are: angry feelings. They
usually derive from past annoying behavior on the part of the person
with ADD. These angry feelings are totally understandable and valid;
however, they should not be used to invalidate a correct diagnosis of
ADD.
2. After an initial burst of improvement, progress slows.
Often when the diagnosis of ADD is made—particularly in adults—
there is an initial period of euphoria: at last there’s a name for all the

with ADD. These angry feelings are totally understandable and valid;
however, they should not be used to invalidate a correct diagnosis of
ADD.
2. After an initial burst of improvement, progress slows.
Often when the diagnosis of ADD is made—particularly in adults—
there is an initial period of euphoria: at last there’s a name for all the
suffering the person has endured through the years. And usually
there is an initial spurt of emotional growth as the treatment begins.
However, after some months, the growth curve begins to level off,
and the individual may become despondent. This is normal and
understandable. The beginning of treatment is exciting, and it is
disappointing to confront the fact that the treatment does not make
all of life’s problems go away. It is at this point of dismay that
support is crucial—from a therapist, from a support group, from
friends, from family, from books. The individual needs help to stay
on course and not revert to old habits of negative thinking and selfsabotage.
3. The person with newly diagnosed ADD does not want to try
medication.

His reasons are not quite clear, but he has a strong, negative
reaction to the idea of medication. This is very common, both in
adults, children, and parents of children. Understandably, no one
wants to take medication unless it is necessary. Any medication, but
particularly medication that affects the brain, deserves special care.
No one should take medication against their wishes (unless they are
mentally incompetent), and no one should be bullied into taking
medication.
If the individual strongly objects to taking medication, he should
not take it. However, before making this decision, it is best to get all
the facts and make a scientific, rather than a superstitious, decision.
Sometimes it takes months or even years before a person decides to
try medication. Everyone has their own timetable. But the
medication stands a much better chance of working if it is taken with
a full understanding of its measured benefits and risks.
4. No medication seems to work.
The key here is to keep trying. Since the field of treatment for
ADD, particularly in adults, is young, and since new medications are
being developed all the time, and old medications are being tried in
new ways, we are still operating largely on a trial-and-error basis.
There is as yet no way to predict with certainty who will respond to
what medication for the treatment of ADD. If one medication does
not work, another one may. If the second does not work, a third may
yet. And changes in dose and timing of dose can also make a big
difference. It can take many months to find just the right medication,
dosage, and dosing schedule.
Some people are exquisitely sensitive to medication. This is not a
problem as long as it is recognized. Some people cannot tolerate
anything but the tiniest dose of any medication. When they get a
headache, they take a quarter of an aspirin. Just a sip of coffee keeps
them up all night. So it can be with the medications used for ADD.
Ten milligrams of Norpramin, a very small dose, may be too much

problem as long as it is recognized. Some people cannot tolerate
anything but the tiniest dose of any medication. When they get a
headache, they take a quarter of an aspirin. Just a sip of coffee keeps
them up all night. So it can be with the medications used for ADD.
Ten milligrams of Norpramin, a very small dose, may be too much

and may make some people feel too activated. They may need to take
10 mg every other day, or, as one of my patients does, cut the pill in
quarters and take 2.5 mg a day. It is important to keep this dosing
sensitivity in mind, because some who could benefit from
microdoses of medication give up too soon, thinking they cannot
tolerate the medication at all.
It can be very frustrating for the patient—and the doctor—as they
try to find just the right medication, or combination of medications,
and the right dosage, but it is important to keep trying.
5. In filling some prescriptions, some pharmacists, in their attempt
to comply with federal drug regulations, make consumers feel as
though they are obtaining illicit drugs.
Looking up from behind the counter, the pharmacist’s eyes seem
to say, “You want Ritalin? What are you, some kind of drug dealer?”
This is because of the association between Ritalin and “speed” in
some people’s minds. Until it is widely known that Ritalin is a safe,
effective, and non-habit-forming treatment for ADD in adults, this
unfortunate situation will probably continue to exist.
6. You can’t find other people who understand what it feels like to
have ADD.
One of the hardest parts about having ADD can be the feeling of
being alone, of being “different,” of feeling misunderstood. An
excellent way to deal with this problem is to join a support group.
These groups bring people together, supply information, build
confidence and camaraderie, and over time reduce one’s sense of
loneliness or isolation. Most parts of the country now have active
ADD groups. You can consult your local pediatrician, psychiatrist,
neurologist, or hospital to locate these groups, or you can call the
organizations listed above or at the end of this book.
7. It is difficult to decide whom to tell about ADD, and difficult to
decide how to tell about it.

It should be possible to talk about having ADD without
encountering suspicions or disbelief. However, this is rarely the case.
People who know nothing about what ADD is—and that includes
most people—can easily misunderstand a description of ADD. They
may think it is an excuse for being lazy, or that it means the person is
mentally ill, or that it is just a fancy word for stupid. In telling other
people about ADD, one should anticipate these misunderstandings
and not be thrown off by them. Have information ready with which
to correct the misconceptions. Try not to get defensive, but rather be
sympathetic with the other person’s point of view. They have never
heard of ADD and at first it sounds pretty fishy. “You mean, there’s a
neurological condition to explain why you’re late, forgetful,
impulsive, and disorganized? Give me a break,” they may say. Be
patient. Over time you will be able to explain it to them, and you may
find they start thinking of other people who have it, maybe even
themselves.
Bringing it up in the workplace can be particularly tricky. There is
a law now to protect against discrimination on the basis of
disabilities, and this includes ADD. The Americans with Disabilities

patient. Over time you will be able to explain it to them, and you may
find they start thinking of other people who have it, maybe even
themselves.
Bringing it up in the workplace can be particularly tricky. There is
a law now to protect against discrimination on the basis of
disabilities, and this includes ADD. The Americans with Disabilities
Act of 1990 (ADA) makes it unlawful to discriminate in employment
against a qualified individual with a disability. ADD is considered a
disability that is guaranteed protection under this law. (For further
information about this very significant law, write to the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, 1801 L Street, NW,
Washington, D.C. 20507, or telephone 202-663-4900.)
However, one may still fear the kind of discrimination that is hard
to pin down, the kind of discrimination that invisibly can undermine
one’s career without being explicit enough to file a grievance over.
The best way of dealing with this situation is to find your way
slowly. Make inroads, form alliances, and when you feel you have
some basis of trust, bring up the subject of ADD in the abstract. Do
some advance educating before you volunteer the fact that you have

it yourself. It is well worth doing this, because if your boss can
understand what ADD is, it can make your work life much more
satisfying and productive. It is simple to devise an ADD program for
the workplace as long as the workplace is receptive to it—and
remember, an employer is bound, under law, to be receptive to what
are called “reasonable accommodations” in the workplace. The same
kinds of strategies that work in the classroom—structure, lists,
reminders, breaking large tasks down into small, elimination of time
limits, reduction of distracting stimuli, encouragement, and support
—help a great deal in the workplace as long as the environment is
receptive. And not only does the law mandate that the employer be
receptive, it is also in the employer’s best interest: people with ADD
are hard, energetic workers. Tapping into their true potential is like
harnessing rushing rapids to a hydroelectric turbine.
8. It is impossible to find a knowledgeable clinician in your area to
diagnose and/or treat ADD, or you can’t find information on ADD.
There are several good places to go for information on where to get
treatment. First, there is your state medical society, as well as your
state neurological, pediatric, and psychiatric societies. Second, any
medical school in your area can help you find a specialist in ADD.
Just ask for the department of neurology or the department of
pediatrics or the department of psychiatry or child psychiatry. Third,
there are several organizations and newsletters devoted to ADD.
These are excellent sources of information as well as support groups.
We offer a partial listing here and a fuller listing at the end of this
book.
Children and Adults with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
(CHADD), a national organization, is a robust and active group
offering information and support to all people involved with ADD.
CHADD and its indefatigable staff have been at the forefront of
advocating both politically and socially for all those with ADD.
Although originally founded to help children with ADD, CHADD has
now expanded to include adult ADD as well. The address of its

offering information and support to all people involved with ADD.
CHADD and its indefatigable staff have been at the forefront of
advocating both politically and socially for all those with ADD.
Although originally founded to help children with ADD, CHADD has
now expanded to include adult ADD as well. The address of its

headquarters is 499 NW 70th Avenue, Suite 308, Plantation, FL
33317. Telephone: (305) 587-3700.
The Attention Deficit Information Network (AD-IN) is another
excellent national organization devoted to helping people with ADD.
Its address is 475 Hillside Avenue, Needham, MA 02194. Telephone:
(617) 455-9895.
ADDendum is a newsletter for adults with ADD. For more
information, write to its editor, Paul Jaffe, Box 296, Scarborough, NY
10510.
The ADDult Support Network is an innovative organization that
publishes a newsletter for adults called the ADDult News. Address:
2620 Ivy Place, Toledo, OH 43613.
Challenge, Inc., publishes an excellent newsletter on ADD.
Address: Box 488, West Newbury, MA 01985. Telephone: (508) 462-
0495.
The Orton Dyslexia Society is a national organization devoted to
the treatment of dyslexia in children and adults. The society and its
highly distinguished directors and advisors are active in promoting
the understanding of ADD, particularly as it interfaces with dyslexia.
Address: Chester Building, Suite 382, 8600 LaSalle Road, Baltimore,
MD 21204-6020. Telephone: (301) 296-6232.
The Appendix to this book contains more listings.
9. Attempts at structuring keep falling apart.
Once the individual understands the importance of structure and
goes to the trouble of setting up a solid system of organization for
himself, he often finds that the system keeps collapsing, or that his
attempts to abide by the system repeatedly fail. This is where a coach
can be invaluable. Rather than letting the system collapse, the coach
can help the individual revise the system, or can offer

encouragement to stay with the system. It is not surprising, after all,
for it to take a while for the new system to start to work; it is
replacing a lifetime of no system. However, the person with ADD can
get discouraged very quickly, not wanting to experience another
failure, and so back away. At these moments the coach can intervene,
offering reassurance, support, and hope.
10. There are lingering feelings of shame and embarrassment about
having ADD.
This is a very common reaction, particularly if the syndrome is not
explained properly. We tend to stigmatize any condition that affects
the brain. However, with support and education the individual
should come to realize that ADD has as many advantages as
disadvantages, that there are many highly successful people in the
world who have ADD, that the company of Mozart, Edison, Einstein,
and Dustin Hoffman isn’t bad, and that the most dangerous stigma
comes from within. People with ADD should stand up and be proud.
While their lives may be full of struggle, their contributions to the joy
and humor, as well as the productivity, of this world are great.

A LOCAL HABITATION AND A NAME

THE BIOLOGY OF ADD
Attention deficit disorder lives in the biology of the brain and the
central nervous system. Although environmental factors do influence
the course of ADD over a lifetime, most practitioners in the field now
agree that the characteristic problems of people with ADD stem from
neurobiological malfunctioning. It is our understanding of the
biological component of the syndrome that has revolutionized our
thinking about ADD in the past decade and shaped our ability to
treat it as effectively as we can today.
We still have much to learn. The exact mechanism underlying
ADD remains unknown. There is no single lesion of the brain, no
single neurotransmitter system, no single gene we have identified
that triggers ADD. The precise workings of the brain that underlie
ADD have so far escaped us, in part due to the extraordinary
complexity of the attentional system.
The attentional system involves nearly all structures of the brain in
one way or another. It governs our consciousness, our waking
experience, our actions and reactions. It is the means through which
we interact with our environment, whether that environment is
composed of math problems, other people, or the mountains on
which we ski.
Still, we have been able to take some steps toward defining, in
terms of the anatomy and chemistry of the brain, the underpinnings
of ADD. With every step forward we become more sure what the
disorder is not: it is not willful misbehaving, it is not a moral failing,
it is not a lack of trying nor an inability to take an interest in the
world. Neurobiological data now show that the syndrome is rooted in
the central nervous system.
How psychologists and medical researchers, building on one
another’s insights over the past century, have come this far in
defining the nature and causes of ADD is a fascinating story of
deduction and persistence.

Where the story began is impossible to say. Certainly, the
symptoms of ADD have been with us as long as history has been
recorded. However, the modern story of ADD, the story of bringing
those symptoms out of the realm of morality and punishment and
into the realm of science and treatment, began somewhere around
the turn of the century.
In 1904 one of the world’s most prestigious medical journals, the
British journal Lancet, published a little doggerel verse that might be
the first published account of ADD in the medical literature.
The Story of Fidgety Philip
“Let me see if Philip can
Be a little gentleman;
Let me see if he is able
To sit still for once at the table.”
Thus Papa bade Phil behave;
And Mama looked very grave.
But Fidgety Phil,
He won’t sit still;
He wriggles,
And giggles,
And then, I declare,

Swings backwards and forwards,
And tilts up his chair,
Just like any rocking horse—
“Philip! I am getting cross!”
See the naughty, restless child
Growing still more rude and wild,
Till his chair falls over quite.
Philip screams with all his might,
Catches at the cloth, but then
That makes matters worse again.
Down upon the ground they fall,
Glasses, plates, knives, forks and all.
How Mama did fret and frown,
When she saw them tumbling down!
And Papa made such a face!
Philip is in sad disgrace …
Fidgety Phil has had many incarnations in popular culture,
including Dennis the Menace and Calvin from “Calvin and Hobbes.”
Most everybody knows a little boy who bangs into things, climbs to

How Mama did fret and frown,
When she saw them tumbling down!
And Papa made such a face!
Philip is in sad disgrace …
Fidgety Phil has had many incarnations in popular culture,
including Dennis the Menace and Calvin from “Calvin and Hobbes.”
Most everybody knows a little boy who bangs into things, climbs to
the top of trees, scales the furniture, beats up on his siblings, talks
back, and displays all the characteristics of being out of control,

maybe a little bit of a bad seed, despite the generosity and best
efforts of the parents. How can this be explained? And how is it that
this person has existed throughout the centuries?
The story might start with the earlier-mentioned George Frederic
Still, M.D., who in 1902 described a group of twenty children who
were defiant, excessively emotional, passionate, lawless, spiteful, and
had little inhibitory volition. This group consisted of three boys for
every girl, and their troubling behaviors all had appeared before the
age of eight. What was most striking to Still was that this group of
kids had been raised in benign environments, with “good-enough”
parenting. Indeed, those children who had been subject to poor
child-rearing were excluded from his analysis. He speculated, in light
of the adequate rearing these children received, there might be a
biological basis to the unbounded behavior, a genetically inherited
proneness toward moral corruption. He gained confidence in his
theory when he discovered that some members of these children’s
families had psychiatric difficulties such as depression, alcoholism,
and conduct problems.
While it was certainly possible that the pathology was
psychological only, and was passed down from generation to
generation as a kind of family neurosis, Still proposed that genetics
and biology should be considered at least as much as free will in
assessing the cause of these children’s problems. This was a new way
of thinking.
Although it would be decades before there was conclusive evidence
bearing Still out, his new way of thinking was pivotal. In the
nineteenth century—and before—“bad” or uncontrollable behavior in
children was seen as a moral failing. Either the parents or the
children or both should be held responsible. The usual “treatment”
for these children was physical punishment. Pediatric textbooks from
that era are full of descriptions of how to beat a child and
exhortations on the necessity of doing so. As clinicians began to
speculate that neurology, rather than the devil, was governing

behavior, a kinder, more effective approach to child-rearing
emerged.
The puzzling contradiction between upbringing and behavior in
this population of children captured the imagination of turn-of-thecentury psychologists. Still’s observations supported the theory of
William James, the father of American psychology. James saw the
deficits in what he called inhibitory volition, moral control, and
sustained attention as being causally related to each other through
an underlying neurological defect. Cautiously, he speculated on the
possibility of either a decreased threshold in the brain for inhibition
of response to various stimuli, or a syndrome of disconnection within
the cortex of the brain in which intellect was dissociated from “will,”
or social conduct.
The trail of Still and James was picked up in 1934, when Eugene
Kahn and Louis H. Cohen published a piece called “Organic

possibility of either a decreased threshold in the brain for inhibition
of response to various stimuli, or a syndrome of disconnection within
the cortex of the brain in which intellect was dissociated from “will,”
or social conduct.
The trail of Still and James was picked up in 1934, when Eugene
Kahn and Louis H. Cohen published a piece called “Organic
Driveness” in the New England Journal of Medicine. Kahn and
Cohen asserted that there was a biological cause for the hyperactive,
impulse-ridden, morally immature behavior of the people they were
seeing who had been hit by the encephalitis epidemic of 1917–18.
This epidemic left some victims chronically immobile (as those
described by Oliver Sacks in his book Awakenings) and others
chronically insomniac, with impaired attention, impaired regulation
of activity, and poor impulse control. In other words, the
characteristics plaguing this latter group were what we now take to
be the diagnostic triad of ADD symptoms: distractibility, impulsivity,
and restlessness. Kahn and Cohen were the first to provide an
elegant description of the relationship between an organic disease
and the symptoms of ADD.
At about the same time, Charles Bradley was developing another
line of evidence linking ADD-like symptoms to biological roots. In
1937, Bradley reported success in using benzedrine, a stimulant, to
treat behaviorally disordered children. This was a serendipitous
discovery that was quite counterintuitive; why should a stimulant

help hyperactive children become less stimulated? Like many
important discoveries in medicine, Bradley couldn’t explain his
discovery; he could only report its veracity.
Soon this population of children would be labeled MBD—minimal
brain dysfunction—and treated with Ritalin and Cylert, two other
stimulants that were found to have a dramatic effect on the
behavioral and social symptoms of the syndrome. By 1957 there was
an attempt to match the symptoms of what was by then called the
“hyperkinetic syndrome” with a specific anatomical structure in the
brain. Maurice Laufer, in Psychosomatic Medicine, placed the
location of dysfunction at the thalamus, a midbrain structure. Laufer
saw hyperkinesis as proof that the work of the thalamus, which was
to filter stimuli, had gone awry. Although his hypothesis was never
proved, it did promote the conception of the disorder as one defined
by an overactivity of a part of the brain.
Throughout the sixties, clinical skill with the hyperkinetic
population improved, and the clinician’s powers of observation grew
more attuned to the nuances of the children’s behavior. It became
more apparent to the clinician’s eye that the syndrome somehow was
due to genetically based malfunctioning of biological systems rather
than to bad parenting or bad behavior. The definition of the
syndrome has evolved through family studies and statistical analysis
of epidemiological data that absolve parents and children of blame
(although the pernicious and unfair tendency to blame parents and
children persists to this day among the ill informed).
By the early seventies the definition of the syndrome included not
just the behaviorally evident hyperactivity, but also the more subtle
symptoms of distractibility and impulsivity. By then, we knew that
ADD clustered in families and was not caused by bad parenting. We
knew that the symptoms were often improved by the use of stimulant

By the early seventies the definition of the syndrome included not
just the behaviorally evident hyperactivity, but also the more subtle
symptoms of distractibility and impulsivity. By then, we knew that
ADD clustered in families and was not caused by bad parenting. We
knew that the symptoms were often improved by the use of stimulant
medication. We thought we knew, but couldn’t prove, that ADD had
a biological basis, and that it was genetically transmitted. However,
this more accurate and encompassing view was not accompanied by

any major new discoveries related to the biological causes of the
syndrome.
Due to the lack of further biological evidence, some people argued
that ADD was a mythical disorder, an excuse contrived to exonerate
reprobate children and their parents. As is usually the case in
psychiatry, the intensity of the debate was inversely proportional to
the availability of factual information.
As in a good mystery, the journey from suspicion to proof, from
speculation to empirical evidence, from Kahn and Cohen to Paul
Wender and Alan Zametkin and Rachel Gittleman-Klein and the
other current researchers, has been riddled with false leads, multiple
possibilities, contradictory findings, and many gut reactions of all
kinds.
One of the first attempts to unite the effects of the stimulants with
what we know about the brain was made by C. Kornetsky, who in
1970 proposed the Catecholamine Hypothesis of Hyperactivity.
Catecholamines are a class of compounds that includes the
neurotransmitters norepinephrine and dopamine. Since the
stimulants affect the norepinephrine and dopamine
neurotransmitter systems by increasing the amount of these
neurotransmitters, Kornetsky concluded that ADD possibly was
caused by an underproduction or underutilization of these
neurotransmitters. Although this hypothesis is still tenable,
biochemical studies and clinical tests of neurotransmitter
metabolites in urine over the past two decades have not been able to
document the specific role of the catecholamines in ADD.
No single neurotransmitter system may be the sole regulator of
ADD. Neurons can convert dopamine into norepinephrine. Many of
the drugs that act on the catecholamines act on serotonin. Some of
the drugs that act on serotonin can act on norepinephrine and
dopamine. And we can’t rule out the role of other neurotransmitters
like GABA (gamma amino butyric acid), which have showed up in

some biochemical studies. The most likely possibility is that the
effect of dopamine and norepinephrine and serotonin is key and
drugs that alter these neurotransmitters will have the most telling
effect on the symptomatology of ADD.
So can we say that ADD is a chemical imbalance? Like most
questions in psychiatry, the answer is yes and then again no. No, we
have not found a good way to measure the specific imbalances in the
neurotransmitter systems that may be responsible for the ADD. But
yes, there is enough evidence that neurochemical systems are altered
in people with ADD to state that the problem derives from the
chemistry of the brain. Most likely, it is a dysregulation along the
catecholamine-serotonin axis, a dance where one misstep by one
partner creates a misstep by the other, which creates another misstep
by the first. Before they know it, these dance partners are out of step
not just with each other but with the music—and who is to say how it
happened?

chemistry of the brain. Most likely, it is a dysregulation along the
catecholamine-serotonin axis, a dance where one misstep by one
partner creates a misstep by the other, which creates another misstep
by the first. Before they know it, these dance partners are out of step
not just with each other but with the music—and who is to say how it
happened?
Alan Zametkin and his colleagues at the National Institutes of
Mental Health may not have defined how it happened, but they did
demonstrate for sure that it was happening, that the biochemical
dance was different in the brains of people with ADD as compared to
the brains of people without ADD. Zametkin created a bridge where
before there had been only a leap of faith. His work is so important
that it is worth a close look.
Zametkin’s study in 1990 examined activity in the brain in adults
with and without ADD. The study did this by watching how the brain
uses glucose, its energy source, during a continuous performance
task. The use of glucose is a good marker of metabolic activity.
Continuous performance tasks are tests that have been designed
specifically to measure attention and vigilance to stimuli. In
Zametkin’s study, subjects had to indicate if and when they heard
particular tones, using a push-button apparatus hooked up to a
computer. This test was administered to twenty-five adults who had
a childhood history of hyperactivity and were diagnosed with ADD

according to Wender’s Utah Criteria. All of these adults, eighteen of
whom were men and seven of whom were women, were the
biological parents of children with ADD. They were matched to a
group of fifty controls who did not have ADD but who shared the
same demographic characteristics as themselves.
To measure glucose metabolism, Zametkin’s group used PET
scans. The PET, or positron emission tomograph, can be described as
an expensive camera that records the radioactivity given off by the
brain after it has used radio-labeled glucose during a specific task.
Through computer manipulation, a composite of numerous data
points is assembled into an image that we can look at and use for
comparisons. What Zametkin found using this technique was a
deficit in glucose uptake, and hence energy use, in the brains of
subjects with ADD as compared to controls. Overall, the ADD group
metabolized glucose at rates 8 percent lower than the control group.
The reduction in glucose uptake was widespread throughout
different regions of the brain. Most informative is that the decrease
in metabolic activity was largest in the prefrontal and premotor
regions of the brain. The frontal region is the major regulator of
behavior. It keeps impulses in check, allows us to plan and
anticipate, and serves as the place where we initiate behavior. It gets
input from the lower brain, which regulates arousal, screens out
irrelevant stimuli, and serves as the seat of fight-or-flight reactions.
It receives input from the limbic system, the seat of emotion, hunger,
thirst, sexuality, and other physiological impulses. And it probably is
the site of working memory, the combination of moment-to-moment
experience and long-term memory. Thus the frontal lobes synthesize
sensory and cognitive information, they orchestrate attention, and
they function as the gateway to action.
As Zametkin pointed out, the results of the PET scans indicating
depressed frontal lobe activity are consistent with what other

experience and long-term memory. Thus the frontal lobes synthesize
sensory and cognitive information, they orchestrate attention, and
they function as the gateway to action.
As Zametkin pointed out, the results of the PET scans indicating
depressed frontal lobe activity are consistent with what other
researchers have claimed to be the functional neuroanatomy of ADD.
Both J. A. Mattes and C. T. Gualtieri have speculated that the frontal

lobes were involved in ADD because of the similarity between ADD
symptoms and frontal-lobe syndromes resulting from injuries or
lesions to the frontal areas. This observation was codified by the
work of G. J. Chelune in 1986 as the frontal-lobe hypothesis, which
posited that hyperactivity and impulsivity are basically a form of
disinhibition. According to this hypothesis, many of the symptoms of
ADD arise because the brain loses its ability to put on the brakes
sufficiently. This is due to disturbed inhibition in the cortex, or outer
layer, of the brain. Without cortical inhibition, the brain fails to block
inappropriate responses and fails to send out appropriate inhibitory
messages. According to Chelune’s frontal-lobe hypothesis, the cortex
of the frontal lobe is where the action is—or isn’t—in ADD. Inhibition
breaks down; impulsivity and hyperactivity rise concurrently.
In addition to giving support to Chelune’s hypothesis, Zametkin’s
findings also support the 1984 work of H. C. Lou and his colleagues,
who found decreased blood flow in the frontal regions of the brain in
people with ADD. Lou’s study also indicated a deficit in blood flow in
the right hemisphere of the brain as compared to the left. This is
intriguing, as some researchers think that ADD is related to righthemisphere dysfunction. The right hemisphere generally controls
our so-called executive or decision-making capacities, our visualspatial abilities, and our ability to process many sources of stimuli
simultaneously. Some specific deficits associated with righthemisphere dysfunction include topographagnosia (getting lost a
lot!) and social-emotional learning disabilities. Martha Denckla, a
specialist in the neuropsychiatry of learning disabilities, points out
that right-hemisphere problems could prevent one from grasping
configurations of many details, “getting the big picture,” so to speak.
Certainly, the picture that is painted of right-hemisphere disabilities
sounds just like the complaints we hear from patients about always
losing their keys, always getting lost, never paying attention to the
big picture, and never quite understanding other people.
Is there accordance between what may be the functional
neuroanatomy of ADD and the role of specific neurotransmitter

systems? Yes, indeed. The prefrontal areas of the brain are rich in
catecholamines, and some research has shown that aged monkeys
whose prefrontal cortices are deficient in dopamine and
norepinephrine perform poorly in delayed-response tests. Delayedresponse tests, like continuous-performance tests, measure attention
and vigilance; they also measure the functioning of working memory.
In addition, dopamine forms a pathway between the motor center
and the frontal regions of the brain, and another pathway from the
limbic center to the frontal regions of the brain. Dopamine neurons
from these lower areas pass through the central frontal lobe to reach
the prefrontal cortex. This doesn’t prove anything, but it does suggest

In addition, dopamine forms a pathway between the motor center
and the frontal regions of the brain, and another pathway from the
limbic center to the frontal regions of the brain. Dopamine neurons
from these lower areas pass through the central frontal lobe to reach
the prefrontal cortex. This doesn’t prove anything, but it does suggest
a role for dopamine in connecting motor activity, emotion, attention,
and impulse control, since dopamine neurons run through the
regions of the brain that regulate these functions.
Recently, it has been speculated that dopamine may even regulate
the overall output of the cortex. A problem with the use of the
catecholamines by the frontal areas would account for the lack of
impulse control, the attention problems, and learning problems. And
although it is more than probable that other neurotransmitters and
other brain structures influence the expression of ADD, the
catecholamine-frontal area relationship is too clearly illustrative of
ADD characteristics to dismiss.
Interestingly enough, the role of working memory may be
significant in the ADD syndrome. As investigated and defined by
Patricia Goldman-Rakic, working memory could be the cause of
many of the clinical manifestations of the syndrome, since working
memory controls our ability to review our past experience, evaluate
our current experience, and plan for the future. Rakic vividly
describes what would happen if working memory were to fail: the
world would be viewed by the brain as a series of disconnected
events, like a series of unrelated slides, rather than as a continuous
sequence, like a movie. We have heard the world as poignantly
described by our patients with ADD, sometimes in the same words.

Life seems discontinuous. There is no sense of history. Each new
experience is met cold.
As is known by clinicians who work with the ADD population, and
by parents of ADD children, and by adults who have ADD, one of the
most frustrating aspects of ADD is the inability to profit from one’s
experience, the inability to focus on consequences, the inability to
navigate through tasks or social situations or the world at large by
using what has been learned previously. If working memory is
expressed in the frontal areas of the brain, and if the frontal areas of
people with ADD are underactive, could we conclude that people
with ADD have impaired working memory? Probably not
conclusively. Yet future research might prove this, as our methods of
investigation and measurement become more sophisticated.
What none of this explains is why ADD seems to run in families
and seems to be passed down through the generations. Most of the
studies that have examined the familial risk of ADD have been
epidemiological, either looking at the incidence of ADD in parents,
offspring, and siblings, or looking at its preponderance among
fraternal and identical twins. The work of Joseph Biederman and
colleagues has shown that up to about 30 percent of parents of ADD
children have ADD themselves. Other researchers have found a
similar rate of ADD among parents. Research also indicates that
relatives of ADD children have a greater risk for ADD than the
relatives of controls. No research to date has been able to investigate
the statistical likelihood that ADD adults will have ADD children,
though existing research, and scientific intuition, leads us to believe
that if you have ADD, there is certainly an increased probability that

relatives of ADD children have a greater risk for ADD than the
relatives of controls. No research to date has been able to investigate
the statistical likelihood that ADD adults will have ADD children,
though existing research, and scientific intuition, leads us to believe
that if you have ADD, there is certainly an increased probability that
one of your children will have ADD. What we cannot do as yet is put
a number on that increased probability.
Twin studies repeatedly find higher rates of ADD in identical twins
as compared to fraternal twins. What does this really mean?
Fraternal twins are genetically related in the same way as siblings are

—the only difference being that fraternal twins share the same
environment for the first nine months of development. Identical
twins, on the other hand, share not only the same prenatal and
postnatal environment, but also the same genetic material. A higher
incidence of ADD in people who share the same genetic blueprint,
versus those who share everything but, means that the genetic
makeup of the individual must be influencing the expression of the
disorder. One large study (127 sets of identical twins and 111 sets of
fraternal twins) recently found that in 51 percent of the identical sets
both twins had ADD, while only 33 percent of those in the fraternal
group shared the ADD diagnosis.
We might wonder why we don’t see 100 percent concordance in
identical twins. Nobody seems to know the answer. Identical-twin
studies of most genetically based disorders, including schizophrenia,
show about a 50 percent concordance rate. The ADD twin studies
reflect this same pattern and are considered to be valid evidence that
there is a genetic predisposition to the disorder.
The strongest evidence for the genetic underpinnings of ADD may
be yet to come. As we saw when looking at the progression of
research into the neurobiology of ADD, solid scientific inquiry
usually begins with speculation, advances through testable
hypotheses and replicable findings, and culminates in empirical
evidence. The work of Biederman and others confirms that
something genetic is happening in this disorder. But what is it? One
of the first clues might be contained in a controversial 1991 study
published in the Journal of the American Medical Association by a
nationwide team of investigators headed by David Comings and
Brenda Comings. This study considered the role played by a
particular dopamine receptor in neuropsychiatric disorders. The
receptor, called the D2 receptor, is made by a particular gene. The
gene has been implicated in early-onset hereditary alcoholism.
Scientists have postulated that it may be associated with a number of
other psychiatric disorders.

The team used a sample of more than three hundred people. They
discovered that the gene was found more frequently in patients with
Tourette’s syndrome, ADD, autism, and alcoholism than in those
without. The investigators do not claim in their report that the gene
is the primary cause of the preceding disorders. But they do claim it
is a modifying gene—a gene that makes some neuropsychiatric
disorders worse if these disorders already are present, due to some
unknown, primary gene. The Comings team concludes that their
study supports a genetic basis for ADD. Although some researchers
do not agree with the findings for various technical reasons, the
study may signal the next wave of sophistication determining the

disorders worse if these disorders already are present, due to some
unknown, primary gene. The Comings team concludes that their
study supports a genetic basis for ADD. Although some researchers
do not agree with the findings for various technical reasons, the
study may signal the next wave of sophistication determining the
genetic basis of ADD by linking it with other kinds of disorders. For
example, if one base gene governs a certain brain formation, it may
be that other modifying genes can produce a variety of syndromes by
playing variations, so to speak, on the formation governed by the
basic gene.
At the least, current evidence supports the contention that ADD is
a syndrome of genetic origin where one’s biological system has
experienced some kind of change—be it chemical, neuroanatomical,
or maturational—and has been rendered out of balance. It is the lack
of balance, the dysregulation of the body’s neurobiological system,
that impairs one’s ability to pay selective attention to one’s
surroundings. The world becomes a land without street signs, the
individual a car in bad need of a tune-up. The vastness of the
attentional system partially accounts for the variation of ADD
“types.” Where one individual needs an oil change, the next needs
spark plugs replaced. Where one individual is withdrawn and
overwhelmed by stimuli, the next is hyperactive and can’t get enough
stimuli. Where one is frequently anxious, the other is depressed. To
compensate, each develops his or her own coping strategies that
developmentally add to, or subtract from, the brain’s various
subsystems. So Mr. A becomes a stand-up comedian, and manic. Ms.
B becomes an architectural wizard with obsessive-compulsive traits.
Their offspring become a sculptor and a stunt pilot. None of them

can balance their checkbook. And all of them wish they had more
time in the day.
With such diversity in the disorder, can we encompass and
describe ADD in a way that is in line with research and clinical
experience, and also allows us to illustrate and sort out the many
symptoms and test results that we find in ADD? There are several
schools of thought on the best way to understand the actual deficit in
attention that plagues individuals with ADD. Each has its merit and
each can serve as a metaphor for the syndrome. For instance, Paul
Wender, in the early seventies, proposed that ADD was due to a
decreased activation of the brain’s reward center and its connections.
He believes the ADD person’s insensitivity to consequences arises
from an inability to be “conditioned” with praise and punishment
because of lowered activity in the neural systems that modulate
reward-and-punishment responses. Wender’s argument is
compelling, since it explains so many of the behavioral problems we
see in ADD, and it is consistent with neuroanatomical and
neurochemical studies.
Russell Barkley similarly describes the primary problem in ADD as
a deficit in the motivation system, which makes it impossible to stay
on task for any length of time unless there is constant feedback,
constant reward. Barkley’s work is often misunderstood and taken to
mean that the child or adult is unmotivated and, therefore, lazy. But
there is a difference between labeling someone as unmotivated and
labeling someone as lacking the biological predisposition to stay on
task without frequent reminders: one is a value judgement, the other

constant reward. Barkley’s work is often misunderstood and taken to
mean that the child or adult is unmotivated and, therefore, lazy. But
there is a difference between labeling someone as unmotivated and
labeling someone as lacking the biological predisposition to stay on
task without frequent reminders: one is a value judgement, the other
a description of a neurological disorder. “There is no ADD while
playing Nintendo,” Dr. Barkley is fond of saying, not meaning, of
course, that the child will be motivated only in desirable situations,
but that the rapid, ever-compelling, visually complex nature of the
video game, and its constant rewards, sufficiently engage the child to
rivet attention.

Low activity in the frontal areas of the brain could explain the
breakdown in goal-directed behavior and self-regulation as described
by Barkley. If there is a problem in maturation or a problem in
regulation of the frontal lobes and the systems that feed into them,
the internal cues that keep us on task and focused on an outcome
would not be loud enough or strong enough or good enough. There is
another group of researchers that views the deficits in attention as a
problem with arousal in the brain system. This group similarly
believes that the messages ADD folks are getting are not loud enough
or good enough, but they believe it’s due to the receipt of external
cues, or to the lack of receipt of external cues, rather than due to a
lack of internal ones.
Larry Silver, a renowned figure for many years in the field of ADD,
describes the syndrome as a faulty filter system in the lower parts of
the brain known as the reticular activating system. In Silver’s model
this injured filter system, which is regulated by the catecholamines,
doesn’t screen out irrelevant information and sensory stimuli as
efficiently as it should, thereby letting everything that registers at the
desk of the reticular activating system arrive in the rooms of the
frontal regions of the brain. The individual is bombarded, taking care
of ten thousand guests in a hotel built for one thousand, on overload
all the time, receiving messages about every minute aspect of his or
her experience. It is no wonder, then, that the individual would be
distractible or, as Silver would argue, inclined to withdraw from it all
and shut the damned hotel down.
Another way to understand ADD is to think in terms of
underarousal of the brain system. According to this view, the person
with ADD does not receive enough input from the lower area of the
brain to the frontal areas. Thus the distractible, hyperactive, and
risk-taking behavior of ADD attempts to heighten the level of arousal
in the frontal cortex. The optimal-arousal theory, as this is
sometimes called, underlies some very effective and innovative
learning strategies. Sydney Zentall believes that heightening the
power of relevant stimuli allows the child to learn much more

risk-taking behavior of ADD attempts to heighten the level of arousal
in the frontal cortex. The optimal-arousal theory, as this is
sometimes called, underlies some very effective and innovative
learning strategies. Sydney Zentall believes that heightening the
power of relevant stimuli allows the child to learn much more

effectively. Because children with ADD notice and usually attend to
novel stimuli, a key to educating these kids is to “dress up”
educational lessons and tools with colors, animation, and diversity,
while limiting all extraneous stimuli and opportunities for
distraction. We have seen this strategy work in adults with ADD, as
well. For example, color-coded notes, files, keys, etc., often help the
adult get organized. Dr. Zentall, describing the management of her
own ADD, talks of carrying small toys around in her pocketbook with
which to amuse herself during boring meetings or times of low
stimulation. One of the most engaging and lively of all researchers in
the field of ADD, Zentall has concocted many practical ways to
enhance novelty and stimulation in everyday life, such as taking
notes on her own thoughts while listening to other people talk, doing
at least two things at once while listening to a lecture, or adding as
much color and other visual pizzazz to one’s surroundings as
possible.
The model for ADD that seems to fit best from our point of view,
however, comes from the school of thought that thinks more in terms
of inhibition and disinhibition than motivation or arousal. Chelune,
Gualtieri, Lou, and a number of other researchers and clinicians have
framed ADD as an inability to stop receiving messages rather than as
an inability to receive the right messages. These people always feel a
press for the next thing and the next thing and the next thing. The
ADD individual is captive to the events of the external world.
Although the difference may seem semantic, it is significant in the
way we describe ADD. It stresses that the positive components of the
syndrome will assist the problematic ones. Instead of framing the
syndrome as an inability to pay attention to cues, this definition
focuses on the ability of someone with ADD to pay attention to many
more cues than the average person. Instead of describing ADD as an
inability to concentrate, this model presents it as the ability to
concentrate on everything. The world always is alive and ripe with
sources of interest. This analysis is supported by the scientific
findings and also has the benefit of removing the stigma of laziness
and the burden of guilt with which ADD people have struggled most

of their lives. It allows them to start considering their strengths,
rather than dwelling on weaknesses.
The disinhibition model fits with what we know about the
functional neuroanatomy and the neurochemistry of the brain. As
noted earlier, the frontal cortex and its associated systems and
neurotransmitters are crucial for the process of inhibiting behaviors,
thoughts, actions, emotions—the impulses with which we all live but
which some of us regulate more easily than others. If there is a
problem in maturation in the frontal systems in ADD, or a problem
in regulation of the dopamine system that feeds into the frontal
areas, ADD very well could be described as a problem with inhibitory
capacity.
If ADD is a problem with inhibiting, we can understand the
phenomenon of time collapsing in on itself for people with ADD:

problem in maturation in the frontal systems in ADD, or a problem
in regulation of the dopamine system that feeds into the frontal
areas, ADD very well could be described as a problem with inhibitory
capacity.
If ADD is a problem with inhibiting, we can understand the
phenomenon of time collapsing in on itself for people with ADD:
instead of being able to carve out discrete activities that would create
a sensation of separate moments, the person cannot stop the
relentless flow of events. Everything runs together, unbraked,
uninhibited. We hear the ADD adult so painfully describing the
verbal rush, the inability to stop the words, and the verbal paralysis,
or stuttering, derived from the inability to stop the thoughts long
enough to find the words. The social intrusiveness that is so
characteristic of those who have ADD is the inability to stop at the
other’s boundaries. The failure to form intimate relationships is the
inability to pause long enough even to listen to the other person, let
alone to understand and respect the other’s needs. The impulsivity,
the lack of planning, and the outbursts are the inability to restrain
the flow of action and feeling.
We also see people with ADD hyperfocusing on an activity, like
rockclimbing or driving or work, probably because it allows them to
forget about the expectations associated with “time.” Our patients
frequently report that they are their most calm when completely
caught up in the thrill of it all, whatever the “all” may be. It could be
fun, a catastrophe, or a life-or-death crisis. These situations allow the

ADD person not only to get into forward motion, but also to forget,
to disregard that they need brakes in the first place. In an emergency,
it’s full speed ahead. What a relief.
The clinician’s challenge is to find a way to allow the ADD person
to put on the brakes. From a biological perspective, one of the most
successful strategies has been the use of medications. The
medications employed to treat ADD interact with the catecholamine
system in such a way as to correct the dysregulated attentional
processes and stop the rush of experience. As detailed in chapter 8,
the medications commonly used include the stimulants and the
tricyclic antidepressants. The stimulants—Ritalin, Cylert, Dexedrine
—act on the catecholamine system. The tricyclics—desipramine and
imipramine—act on the catecholamine system and on the serotonin
system, with the greatest effect being on norepinephrine. Both types
of drugs increase the levels of the neurotransmitters they affect,
allowing more of the particular neurotransmitter to be available for
use by the brain.
Because we do not know precisely what is causing the ADD, we
cannot know exactly where the drugs are working. They could work
at the beginning or at the end of the line, in the lower brain or in the
cortex. If they work in the lower part of the brain, and effect the
modulation of arousal, they might be up-regulating the entire system
and letting only relevant stimuli make its way to the frontal lobes. If
they work directly in the front regions of the brain, they might
awaken an otherwise sleepy cortex. Wender speculates that the drugs
work in the middle of this loop, in the limbic system. He proposes
that the action of norepinephrine in the limbic system is impaired,
and since incoming stimuli from the lower brain must pass through
the limbic system before reaching the frontal lobes, it is possible that

awaken an otherwise sleepy cortex. Wender speculates that the drugs
work in the middle of this loop, in the limbic system. He proposes
that the action of norepinephrine in the limbic system is impaired,
and since incoming stimuli from the lower brain must pass through
the limbic system before reaching the frontal lobes, it is possible that
a problem in regulation of this area would cause the disinhibition in
the frontal regulatory processes.
Either way, we feel the effects of the drugs in the cortex, the
treetops of our brains. The drugs enhance the functioning and use of

neurotransmitters in the frontal regions and smooth out regulatory
and attentional functioning. Their effectiveness has been
documented in numerous studies, through numerous means. The
use of stimulants generally improves scores in continuousperformance tests, school performance, behavioral rating scales, and
self-reports.
And the effect is immediate, unlike the drug action in almost any
other neurobiologic disorder. The immediacy of action indicates that
the drugs have a direct effect at the synaptic level, the cellular
juncture where one neuron passes a message to the next. Right away
they improve the way one brain cell communicates with another, as if
they have come along and swept out the blockage in the synapse.
Other medications that affect the brain, such as those used to treat
depression, schizophrenia, panic, and anxiety, work to reset the
neuronal network. They gradually change receptor sensitivity to
neurotransmitters, or otherwise change the structure of the neuronal
communication system. They work as traffic coordinators instead of
street sweepers, rerouting information along different channels.
It may be that the stimulants create an equilibrium in the
chemistry of the frontal regions of the brain without requiring the
whole system to change. This allows tonic control of the frontal
systems; that is, the job of the frontal lobes becomes easier and less
prone to interruptions. Inhibiting thoughts and feelings and actions
becomes easier. The beginnings and endings of moments in time
become clear, and deliberation, planning, and pausing finally
become possible. Life becomes continuous rather than disjointed.
In many ways, our understanding of the biology of ADD is still in
its first chapter. The next few decades will be more exciting as our
ability to test, measure, and evaluate the biological processes
implicated in neurobiologic disorders expands. Although it is
doubtful we will find the magic bullet that can rid an individual of
ADD, one day our methods of treatment might be sophisticated

enough so that the frustrations and uncertainties of living with the
syndrome will be eased, and those with ADD can draw confidently on
their thoughts.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
One of the great pleasures of writing this book was the help and
encouragement we received from many sources.
Our patients helped us first of all. They created this book. By
teaching us about ADD and by giving us their stories to share with
others, they gave of themselves in a most personal way. We hope this
book lives up to their generosity.
Many other individuals helped us. We thank Sandra Freed
Thomas, past president of CH.A.D.D., a national ADD organization,
for her encouragement from the start; Jill Kneerim, our agent, for
her disciplined guidance; Susan Grace Galassi for her early reading
of the manuscript and Jonathan Galassi for his support all along;

Many other individuals helped us. We thank Sandra Freed
Thomas, past president of CH.A.D.D., a national ADD organization,
for her encouragement from the start; Jill Kneerim, our agent, for
her disciplined guidance; Susan Grace Galassi for her early reading
of the manuscript and Jonathan Galassi for his support all along;
Priscilla Vail for all her help, particularly with the dyslexias and other
language problems; the late Carol Rinzler, for so many kinds of help;
the team at Pantheon, including our editor, Linda Healey, for her
suggestions, which were always helpful, and for her exacting and
imaginative reading of the manuscript, which improved it greatly;
her assistant, Jennifer Trone, for skillfully keeping us focused while
seeming to remain unobtrusive; and Fred Wiemer for his superb
copy editing.
We are thankful to Lyn, Tom, and Tim Bliss for many helpful
suggestions; James Hallowell for his persistent skepticism, which
helped us keep a balanced view; Ellen D’Ambrosia for her warm
support; Peter Metz for his invaluable consultations, freely given no
matter how busy he was himself; Kevin Murphy, Russell Barkley, and
the rest of the staff of the University of Massachusetts Medical
Center ADD Clinic for their help and advice on ADD in adults; Betsy
Busch for her always useful advice; Edward Khantzian for his most
helpful ideas regarding ADD and addictions; Paul Wender for his
encouragement and counsel; Catherine Leveroni, Andrea Miller, and
the rest of John Ratey’s staff at Medfield State Hospital for their
tireless attention to many details.

We are indebted to Lisa Poast for the list of support groups that
appears in the Appendix; Elizabeth Leimkuhler for many
observations on ADD in adults; Leopold Bellak, for an early
conversation that helped start us thinking; John and Ben Hallowell,
for encouraging their little brother to write; and our wives, Sue
George Hallowell and Nancy Blackmore, for their ideas and their
support, patience, and enthusiasm for this project from beginning to
end.
—E. M. H.
—J. J. R. 



APPENDIX
WHERE TO FIND HELP
ADHD Coaches Organization
701 Hunting Place
Baltimore, MD 21229
(888) 638-3999
Fax: (410) 630-6991
www.adhdcoaches.org
Anxiety Disorders Association of America
8730 Georgia Avenue, Suite 600
Silver Spring, MD 20910
(240) 485-1001
Fax: (240) 485-1035
information@adaa.org
www.adaa.org
Attention Deficit Disorder Association (ADDA)
PO Box 7557
Wilmington, DE 19803-9997
(800) 939-1019

adda@jmoadmin.com
www.add.org
Children and Adults with Attention Deficit Disorder
(CHADD)
8181 Professional Place, Suite 150
Landover, MD 20785
(301) 306-7070
Fax: (301) 306-7090
www.chadd.org
CH.A.D.D. is the national and international nonprofit parentsupport organization for children and adults with ADD.
Parents Helping Parents: Parent-Directed Family
Resource Center for Children with Special Needs
3041 Olcott St.
Santa Clara, CA 95054
(408) 727-5775
Fax: (408) 727-0182
info@php.com
www.php.com

CH.A.D.D. is the national and international nonprofit parentsupport organization for children and adults with ADD.
Parents Helping Parents: Parent-Directed Family
Resource Center for Children with Special Needs
3041 Olcott St.
Santa Clara, CA 95054
(408) 727-5775
Fax: (408) 727-0182
info@php.com
www.php.com

Organizations to Contact for Information About Learning Disabilities and
Dyslexia
The International Dyslexia Society
40 York Rd., 4th Floor
Baltimore, MD 21204
(410) 296-0232
Fax: (410) 321-5069
www.interdys.org
Learning Disabilities Association of America
4156 Library Road
Pittsburgh, PA 15234-1349
(412) 341-1515
Fax: (412) 344-0224
www.ldanatl.org
National Center for Learning Disabilities
381 Park Avenue South, Suite 1401
New York, NY 10016
(212) 545-7510
Fax: (212) 545-9665
www.ncld.org

National Dissemination Center for Children with
Disabilities
1825 Connecticut Ave, NW, Suite 700
Washington, D.C. 20009
(800) 695-0285
Fax: (202) 884-8441
www.nichcy.org
Newsletters
ADDult ADDvice
Attention Deficit Disorder Resources
223 Tacoma Ave S #100
Tacoma, WA 98402
(253) 759-5085
Fax: (253) 572-3700
www.addresources.org
This newsletter includes substantive articles about issues relevant to
adults with ADD, as well as a listing of resources and support-group
announcements. ADDult News welcomes letters, comments,
personal stories, poems, and artwork.
ADDitude

New Hope Media
39 W. 37th Street, 15th Floor
New York, NY 10018
www.attitudemag.com
ADDitude magazine has several free newsletters covering everything
from Adult ADD to the latest ADHD research. Subscribe online or
call (888) 762-8475.
The ADHD Report
Guilford Publications
72 Spring Street
New York, NY 10012
(800) 365-7006
Fax: (212) 966-6708
Russell Barkley, Editor
To subscribe call (800) 365-7006 or visit www.guilford.com. This is
a superb newsletter edited by one of the foremost authorities on the
subject. It is a must for any parent, clinician, school official, or
individual who wants to stay current with new developments in the
field.

Offices to Contact for Information About the Americans with Disabilities Act,
Equal Opportunity Issues, Educational Rights, and Legal Advocacy:
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
131 M Street NE
Washington, D.C. 20507
Phone: (202) 663-4900
Contact the EEOC about employment issues related to the Americans
with Disabilities Act. Title 1 of ADA prevents an employer from
discriminating against a qualified individual with a mental or
physical disability with regards to job-application procedures, hiring,
discharge, compensation, advancement, job training, and other
conditions and privileges of employment.
Department of Justice
Office of Americans with Disabilities Act
Civil Rights Division
950 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 20530
(800) 514-0383
Fax: (202) 307-1198
www.ada.gov
Contact the Department of Justice about “public accommodation”
issues, as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act. Title III of
the act prohibits any private entity that owns, leases, or operates a
place of public accommodation (e.g., restaurants, retail stores,

Fax: (202) 307-1198
www.ada.gov
Contact the Department of Justice about “public accommodation”
issues, as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act. Title III of
the act prohibits any private entity that owns, leases, or operates a
place of public accommodation (e.g., restaurants, retail stores,

colleges, and graduate schools) from discriminating against an
individual on the basis of disability.
Judge David L. Bazelon Center for Mental Health Law
www.bazelon.org
The Bazelon Center is an information and advocacy organization that
focuses on laws, policies, and regulations that affect the civil rights of
people with mental disabilities.
Office of Civil Rights
U.S. Department of Education
400 Maryland Avenue SW
Washington, D.C. 20202
(800) 872-5327
www.ed.gov
Contact OCR with issues pertaining to Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act (1973), and the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act (IDEA), both of which provide guidelines for the
rights of individuals with ADD in public school settings.
Job Accommodation Network
PO Box 6080
Morgantown, WV 26506-6080
(800) 526-7234

(800) ADA-WORK
www.jan.wvu.edu
Readings and References About ADD
The following list contains books and other resources that we think
will be helpful in learning more about ADD and LD in adults and
children. It is only a sample, however, of the many excellent and
informative publications that are available about attention deficit
disorder. The books are presented alphabetically by title, with the
exception of the first two.
Answers to Distraction. Revised and Updated. Edward M. Hallowell
and John J. Ratey. Anchor Books, New York, 2010. A companion
book to Driven to Distraction in which Hallowell and Ratey respond
to the most frequently asked questions about ADD.
Delivered from Distraction: Getting the Most Out of Life with
Attention Deficit Disorder. Ballantine Books, New York, 2005.
Hallowell and Ratey provide a new screening questionnaire for
adults and list methods that physicians, parents, and educators can
use to diagnose and treat the ADD child. Includes recommended
steps for living a satisfying life with ADD.
ADD and the College Student: A Guide for High School and College
Students with ADD. Patricia O. Quinn. Magination Press,
Washington, D.C., 2001. A practical guide in a field where much
guidance is needed.
ADD-Friendly Ways to Organize Your Life by Judith Kolberg and
Kathleen Nadeau. Routledge, New York, 2002. Focusing on the
particular dilemmas and challenges of adults with ADD, this book
provides organizational skills for life, allowing energy to be focused
on strengths, rather than disorder.

ADHD: A Complete and Authoritative Guide by Michael I. Reiff,
M.D. American Academy of Pediatrics, Chicago, 2004.
ADHD & Me: What I Learned from Lighting Fires at the Dinner
Table by Blake E. S. Taylor. New Harbinger, Oakland, CA, 2008.
Written when Blake was seventeen, this is a young person’s account
of what it’s like to live and grow up with this common condition.
Attention Deficit Disorder: A Different Perception. Thom Hartmann.
Underwood Books, Novato, CA, 1997. An interesting theory. Thom
Hartmann has done a great deal to help “normalize” ADD. He is an
innovative thinker and a good writer.
Attention Deficit Disorder in Adults: A Different Way of Thinking,
Fourth Edition. Lynn Weiss, Ph.D. Taylor Publishing Company,
Dallas, 2005. Emphasizes the ways in which ADD symptoms appear

Underwood Books, Novato, CA, 1997. An interesting theory. Thom
Hartmann has done a great deal to help “normalize” ADD. He is an
innovative thinker and a good writer.
Attention Deficit Disorder in Adults: A Different Way of Thinking,
Fourth Edition. Lynn Weiss, Ph.D. Taylor Publishing Company,
Dallas, 2005. Emphasizes the ways in which ADD symptoms appear
in adults. Reviews treatment and coping strategies and includes a list
of clinicians across the country who are specializing in treating
adults with ADD.
A Bird’s-Eye View of Life with ADD and ADHD: Advice from Young
Survivors by Chris A. Zeigler Dendy and Alex Zeigler. A resource for
teenagers that gives firsthand advice from their peers. It was written
by twelve teens and a young adult who are living with ADHD.
The Disorganized Mind by Nancy A. Ratey. St. Martin’s, New York,
2008. Addresses the daily challenges of Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder, which include difficulty with organization,
focus, and time management. Ratey, a professional ADHD coach
who was diagnosed with the disorder herself while in graduate
school, provides a set of concrete tools that ADHD adults can use to
help themselves traverse both personal and professional situations.
Diagnosing Learning Disorders: A Neuropsychological
Framework, second edition. Bruce B. Pennington. The Guilford
Press, New York, 2008. A superb overview. Written more for the
professional than the lay reader.

Is It You, Me, or Adult A.D.D.? Stopping the Roller-Coaster When
Someone You Love Has A.D.D. by Gina Pera and Russell Barkley,
Ph.D. 1201 Alarm Press, San Francisco, CA, 2008. For couples where
one or both partners have Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder,
this is a thoughtful synthesis of clinical and research literature, as
well as a creative study of the complex ways in which ADHD affects
relationships.
Making ADD Work: On-the-Job Strategies for Coping with
Attention Deficit Disorder by Blythe Grossberg. Penguin, New York,
2005. Career consultant and psychologist Blythe Grossberg offers
advice on managing ADD symptoms that arise during daily work
routines and provides insights from well-known entrepreneurs,
CEOs, professional athletes, and others afflicted with the condition
who paved their way to success.
Making the System Work for Your Child with ADHD by Peter S.
Jensen. The Guilford Press, New York, 2004. Gives parents the
whats, whys, and how-tos of making the system work—getting their
money’s worth from the health-care system, cutting through red tape
at school, and making the most of fleeting time with doctors and
therapists.
Straight Talk About Psychiatric Medications for Kids, revised
edition by Timothy E. Wilens. The Guilford Press, New York, 2004.
Provides information that will enable readers to fully understand
what their child’s doctor is recommending, and what their options
are.
Taking Charge of ADHD: The Complete Authoritative Guide for
Parents, revised edition by Russell A. Barkley. The Guilford Press,
New York, 2000. A useful resource for teachers and others involved
in the care and education of ADHD children.
Trauma and Recovery. Judith Lewis Herman, M.D. Basic Books,
New York, 1997. While not touching on ADD, this moving book

Parents, revised edition by Russell A. Barkley. The Guilford Press,
New York, 2000. A useful resource for teachers and others involved
in the care and education of ADHD children.
Trauma and Recovery. Judith Lewis Herman, M.D. Basic Books,
New York, 1997. While not touching on ADD, this moving book

discusses trauma as well as any book has. Since many people with
learning disabilities or attention deficit disorder also have a history
of trauma, we mention this book here.
You Mean I’m Not Lazy, Stupid, or Crazy?!: A Self-Help Book for
Adults with Attention Deficit Disorder, updated edition. Kate Kelly
and Peggy Ramundo. Scribner, New York, 2006. Written by and for
ADD adults, this book includes tips on coping with, organizing, and
living the life of an ADD adult.
Educational Vendors
ADD WareHouse
300 Northwest 70th Avenue, Suite 102
Plantation, FL 33317
(800) 233-9273
http://addwarehouse.com
Support Groups
CHADD runs a wide network of volunteer chapters across the nation.
The most recent list can be found at www.chadd.org/localchapters. If
you are interested in starting a CHADD group in your area or have
questions about one of their chapters, please contact their national
offices at (800) 233-4050.
