Mastering Your Adult ADHD

 
Editor-In-Chief
David H. Barlow, PhD
Scientific Advisory Board
Anne Marie Albano, PhD
Gillian Butler, PhD
David M. Clark, PhD
Edna B. Foa, PhD
Paul J. Frick, PhD
Jack M. Gorman, MD
Kirk Heilbrun, PhD
Robert J. McMahon, PhD
Peter E. Nathan, PhD
Christine Maguth Nezu, PhD
Matthew K. Nock, PhD
Paul Salkovskis, PhD
Bonnie Spring, PhD
Gail Steketee, PhD
John R. Weisz, PhD
G. Terence Wilson, PhD
TREATMENTS THAT WORK

1
TREATMENTS THAT WORK
CLIENT WORKBOOK
 
STEVEN A. SAFREN
SUSAN E. SPRICH
CAROL A. PERLMAN
MICHAEL W. OTTO
Mastering Your 
Adult ADHD
A Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment Program
Second Edition

1
 
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers
the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education
by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University
Press in the UK and certain other countries.
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America.
© Oxford University Press 2017
First Edition published in 2005
Second Edition published in 2017
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction
rights organization. Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above.
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.
ISBN 978–0–19–023556–7
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed by WebCom, Inc., Canada

v
 
About TREATMENTS THAT WORK
One of the most difficult problems confronting patients with various disorders and diseases is finding the best help available. Everyone is aware of 
friends or family who have sought treatment from a seemingly reputable 
practitioner, only to find out later from another doctor that the original 
diagnosis was wrong or the treatments recommended were inappropriate 
or perhaps even harmful. Most patients, or family members, address this 
problem by reading everything they can about their symptoms, seeking out information on the Internet or aggressively “asking around” to 
tap knowledge from friends and acquaintances. Governments and health 
care policymakers are also aware that people in need do not always get 
the best treatments—something they refer to as variability in health 
care practices.
Now health care systems around the world are attempting to correct this 
variability by introducing evidence-based practice. This simply means that 
it is in everyone’s interest that patients get the most up-to-date and effective care for a particular problem. Health care policymakers have also 
recognized that it is very useful to give consumers of health care as much 
information as possible, so that they can make intelligent decisions in a 
collaborative effort to improve physical health and mental health. This 
series, Treatments That Work, is designed to accomplish just that. Only 
the latest and most effective interventions for particular problems are 
described in user-friendly language. To be included in this series, each

information as possible, so that they can make intelligent decisions in a 
collaborative effort to improve physical health and mental health. This 
series, Treatments That Work, is designed to accomplish just that. Only 
the latest and most effective interventions for particular problems are 
described in user-friendly language. To be included in this series, each 
treatment program must pass the highest standards of evidence available, 
as determined by a scientific advisory board. Thus, when individuals suffering from these problems or their family members seek out an expert 
clinician who is familiar with these interventions and decides that they are 
appropriate, patients will have confidence they are receiving the best care 
available. Of course, only your health care professional can decide on the 
right mix of treatments for you.
This particular program presents the first evidence-based psychological treatment for adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (adult 
ADHD). In this program, you will learn skills that directly attack the 

vi
 
symptoms that make living with adult ADHD so difficult. These symptoms include difficulty focusing attention and being easily distracted, difficulties with organization and planning, and impulsivity. This program 
can be effectively combined with medications, or for individuals who 
derive relatively little benefit from medications, this program may be sufficient on its own. This fully updated second edition of the Workbook 
contains worksheets, forms, and online resources to help you during 
treatment and is most effectively applied by working in collaboration 
with your clinician.
David H. Barlow, Editor-in-Chief,
Treatments ThatWork
Boston, MA
References
Barlow, D. H. (2004). Psychological treatments. American Psychologist, 59, 869–878.
Barlow, D. H. (2010). Negative effects from psychological treatments: A perspective. American 
Psychologist, 65(2), 13–20.
Institute of Medicine. (2001). Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system for the 21st century. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
McHugh, R. K. & Barlow, D. H. (2010). Dissemination and implementation of evidence-based 
psychological interventions: A review of current efforts. American Psychologist, 65(2), 73–84.

vii
 
All forms and worksheets from books in the TTW series are made available digitally shortly following print publication. You may download, print, save, and digitally complete them as PDF’s. 
To access the forms and worksheets, please visit http://www.oup.com/us/ttw.
Accessing Treatments ThatWork Forms and Worksheets Online

 

ix
 
Chapter 1 Information About Adult ADHD 1
Chapter 2 Overview of This Treatment Program for ADHD 
in Adulthood 9
Chapter 3 Informational Session with Spouse, Partner, or Family 
Member (if applicable) 17
Module 1 Organizing and Planning
Chapter 4 The Foundation: Organizing and Planning Skills 23
Chapter 5 Organization of Multiple Tasks 31
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Managing 
Overwhelming Tasks 39
Chapter 7 Organizational Systems 45
Module 2 Reducing Distractibility
Chapter 8 Gauging Your Attention Span and 
Distractibility Delay 53
Chapter 9 Modifying Your Environment 61
Module 3 Adaptive Thinking
Chapter 10 Introducing a Cognitive Model of ADHD 69
Chapter 11 Adaptive Thinking 83
Chapter 12 Rehearsal and Review of Adaptive Thinking Skills 93
Contents

Module 2 Reducing Distractibility
Chapter 8 Gauging Your Attention Span and 
Distractibility Delay 53
Chapter 9 Modifying Your Environment 61
Module 3 Adaptive Thinking
Chapter 10 Introducing a Cognitive Model of ADHD 69
Chapter 11 Adaptive Thinking 83
Chapter 12 Rehearsal and Review of Adaptive Thinking Skills 93
Contents

x
 
Module 4 Additional Skills
Chapter 13 Application of Skills to Procrastination (optional) 99
Chapter 14 Handling Slips 107
Appendix Forms and Worksheets 111
References 125
About the Authors 127

 
Mastering Your Adult ADHD

 

1
CHAPTER 1
OVERVIEW
This chapter will provide you with information about ADHD in adulthood, how ADHD is diagnosed in adults, and an orientation to the 
cognitive-behavioral model of ADHD. This information will help you 
decide if this treatment program is right for you.
GOALS
■ To understand the characteristics of ADHD in adulthood
■ To learn why ADHD symptoms continue in adults even after 
treatment with medications
■ To understand that ADHD is a valid diagnosis for adults
What Is ADHD?
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a valid, medical, psychiatric disorder. ADHD begins in childhood, and many children with 
ADHD go on to have significant symptoms as adults. As shown in Figure 1.1, 
there are three major types of symptoms people have:  poor attention, 
hyperactivity, and impulsivity.
The term disinhibition (lack of inhibition) is also sometimes used to 
describe the impulsivity and hyperactivity symptoms. Many people with 
ADHD have at least some symptoms of poor attention, some symptoms 
Information About Adult ADHD

2
of hyperactivity, and some symptoms of impulsivity, although many people have symptoms that are predominately from one category. The term 
attention deficit disorder (ADD) is also sometimes used when an individual has the attentional symptoms but not the hyperactivity symptoms.
ADHD Is Not Related to Intelligence or Laziness
Patients with ADHD can learn coping skills to manage associated difficulties. Kate Kelly and Peggy Ramundo have written a self-help book 
for adults with ADHD called You Mean I’m Not Lazy, Stupid, or Crazy?
(1993). This title underscores many of the common misperceptions that 
people with ADHD have about themselves.
ADHD is a neurobiological disorder, unrelated to intelligence, laziness, 
aptitude, being or not being crazy, and so on. This treatment program, 
which typically begins after an individual has been taking ADHD medications for several months, can help control the symptoms of ADHD for 
adults. By actively learning skills and practicing them regularly, you will 
see significant improvements.
SYMPTOMS OF IMPULSIVITY
Interrupt often
Answer questions before person nishes 
asking
Blurt out inappropriate comments
Act before thinking
Do things you later regret
Difculty waiting
SYMPTOMS OF POOR ATTENTION
Distracted easily
Difculty organizing
Easily bored
Switch from one task to another
Difculty planning
Difculty concentrating 
Can’t do boring or unattractive tasks
SYMPTOMS OF HYPERACTIVITY
Feel like driven by a motor
Restless
Can’t sit still
Always on the go
Fidgety
Figure 1.1
Symptoms of poor attention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity

Easily bored
Switch from one task to another
Difculty planning
Difculty concentrating 
Can’t do boring or unattractive tasks
SYMPTOMS OF HYPERACTIVITY
Feel like driven by a motor
Restless
Can’t sit still
Always on the go
Fidgety
Figure 1.1
Symptoms of poor attention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity

3
What Are the Specific Criteria for a Diagnosis of ADHD?
Generally, a diagnosis of ADHD is made by a mental health professional, 
using the definition set forth in the American Psychiatric Association 
(APA)’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition 
(DSM-5; 2013). The DSM-5 lists all of the various psychiatric disorders 
and the symptoms and other requirements that an individual must display to be diagnosed with them.
To meet the DSM-5 criteria for adult ADHD, individuals must have at 
least five out of the nine possible inattention symptoms and/or five out 
of the nine possible symptoms of hyperactivity/impulsivity. Individuals 
who have five or more symptoms in only the inattention category have 
ADHD, predominantly inattentive presentation. Those who have five or 
more symptoms in the hyperactivity/impulsivity category have ADHD, 
predominantly hyperactive/impulsive presentation. And those with five or 
more symptoms in both categories have ADHD, combined presentation.
Inattentive symptoms include such things as failing to give close attention to 
details, difficulty sustaining attention in tasks, seeming not to listen when 
being spoken to directly, failure to follow through on instructions, difficulties with organization, avoidance of tasks that require sustained mental 
effort, frequently losing things, getting distracted easily, and being forgetful.
Hyperactive/impulsive symptoms include fidgeting, leaving one’s seat frequently, feelings of restlessness, being unable to engage in quiet activities, 
being “on the go,” talking excessively, blurting out answers, having difficulty waiting in lines, and frequently interrupting.
In addition, (1) the person needs to have had at least some of the symptoms before the age of 12, (2) the symptoms need to be present in at least 
two different settings, (3) the symptoms need to clearly interfere with the 
individual’s ability to function, and (4) it must be clear that the symptoms 
are not better accounted for by a different mental disorder (APA, 2013).
How Do We Distinguish ADHD as a Diagnosis from Normal Functioning?
Some of the symptoms listed above sound like they might apply to almost 
anyone at certain times. For example, most people would probably say that 
they are sometimes easily distracted or sometimes have problems organizing. This is actually the case with many of the psychiatric disorders. For 
example, everyone gets sad sometimes, but not everyone meets criteria for

Some of the symptoms listed above sound like they might apply to almost 
anyone at certain times. For example, most people would probably say that 
they are sometimes easily distracted or sometimes have problems organizing. This is actually the case with many of the psychiatric disorders. For 
example, everyone gets sad sometimes, but not everyone meets criteria for 

4
a clinical diagnosis of depression. To qualify for a diagnosis of ADHD, the 
person must have significant difficulties with some aspect of his or her life, 
such as work, school, or relationships. In DSM-5, there is more attention 
to impairment specific to adults, such as impairment in work situations.
Also, to qualify for the diagnosis, the person’s distress and impairment 
must be caused by ADHD and not by another disorder. A  thorough 
assessment is needed to rule out the possibility that the symptoms reflect 
another psychiatric disorder.
How Do Cognitive and Behavioral Variables Make ADHD Worse for Adults?
Cognitive components (thoughts and beliefs) can worsen ADHD symptoms. For example, a person who is facing something that he will find 
overwhelming might shift his attention elsewhere, or think things like, 
“I can’t do this,” “I don’t want to do this,” or “I will do this later.” Behavioral 
components are the things people do that can make ADHD symptoms 
worse. The actual behaviors can include things like avoiding doing what 
you should be doing or keeping or not keeping an organizational system.
Later in this chapter, we show a model of how we believe ADHD affects 
the lives of adults. According to this model, the core symptoms of ADHD 
are biologically based. However, we believe that cognitive and behavioral 
variables also affect symptom levels.
Core neuropsychiatric impairments, starting in childhood, prevent effective 
coping. By definition, adults with ADHD have been suffering from this disorder chronically since childhood. Specific symptoms such as distractibility, 
disorganization, difficulty following through on tasks, and impulsivity can 
prevent people with ADHD from learning or using effective coping skills.
Because of these symptoms, individuals with this disorder typically have 
sustained underachievement, or other experiences that they might label as 
“failures.” In turn, this history of failures can result in people with ADHD 
developing overly negative beliefs about themselves, as well as negative, 
maladaptive thinking when approaching tasks. The negative thoughts 
and beliefs that ensue can therefore add to avoidance or distractibility. 
Therefore, people with ADHD shift their attention even more when confronted with tasks or problems that they may find difficult or boring, and 
related behavioral symptoms can also get worse.
A model of how these factors interrelate is presented in Figure 1.2.

and beliefs that ensue can therefore add to avoidance or distractibility. 
Therefore, people with ADHD shift their attention even more when confronted with tasks or problems that they may find difficult or boring, and 
related behavioral symptoms can also get worse.
A model of how these factors interrelate is presented in Figure 1.2.

5
Don’t Medications Effectively Treat ADHD?
Yes. Medications are currently the first-line treatment approach for adult 
ADHD, and they are the most extensively studied. The classes of these 
medications are stimulants, tricyclic antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors (antidepressants), and atypical antidepressants. However, 
a good number of individuals (approximately 20% to 50%) who take 
antidepressants are considered nonresponders. A nonresponder is an individual whose symptoms are not sufficiently reduced, or someone who 
cannot tolerate the medications. Additionally, adults who are considered 
responders typically show a reduction in only 50% or less of the core 
symptoms of ADHD.
Because of these data, recommendations for the best treatment of 
adult ADHD include using psychotherapy (cognitive-behavioral therapy in particular) with medications. Medications can reduce many of 
the core symptoms of ADHD: attentional problems, high activity, and 
impulsivity.
Mood
Disturbance 
Depression
Guilt
Anxiety
Anger
Core 
(Neuropsychiatric) 
Impairments in
Attention
Inhibition
Self-Regulation
(impulsivity) 
Negative thoughts and 
beliefs (e.g., negative 
self-statements, low 
self-esteem)
Functional
Impairment
Failure to Utilize
Compensatory Strategies 
– examples:
Organizing
Planning (i.e., task
list) 
Managing
procrastination,
avoidance,
distractibility 
History of 
Failure
Underachievement
Relationship problems 
Figure 1.2
Cognitive-behavioral model of adult ADHD
Reprinted from S. A. Safren, S. Sprich, S. Chulvick, & M. W. Otto (2004). Psychosocial treatments for adults with ADHD. Psychiatric Clinics 
of North America, 27(2), 349–360, © 2004 Elsevier Inc., with permission from Elsevier.

6
You may be asking yourself why this treatment program is needed in 
addition to medications. The answer is that medications alone cannot 
provide adults with ADHD with concrete strategies and skills for coping. 
Furthermore, disruptions resulting from ADHD, such as underachievement, unemployment or underemployment, economic problems, and 
relationship difficulties, call for additional interventions to improve the 
person’s quality of life.
ADHD in Adulthood Is a Real and Valid Medical Condition
We are including this section here in this client workbook because in 
the recent past, ADHD was a controversial diagnosis. However, the past 
several decades of study have shown that its validity is now strong. Here 
we will describe the controversy regarding the diagnosis and outline the 
evidence that has led experts to conclude that adult ADHD is a prevalent, 
distressing, impairing, and valid medical diagnosis.
Psychiatric and Psychological Diagnoses Are Difficult to Validate 
Compared to Other Biomedical Diseases
ADHD in adulthood is a real, reliably diagnosed medical illness that 
may affect up to 5% of the adults in the United States. ADHD in 
adulthood has historically been a controversial diagnosis. One of the 
reasons for this is that psychiatric diagnoses, in general, are difficult to 
validate. In many other medical fields, doctors can perform a blood

ADHD in adulthood is a real, reliably diagnosed medical illness that 
may affect up to 5% of the adults in the United States. ADHD in 
adulthood has historically been a controversial diagnosis. One of the 
reasons for this is that psychiatric diagnoses, in general, are difficult to 
validate. In many other medical fields, doctors can perform a blood 
test, do an x-ray, take a biopsy, or even take a patient’s temperature to 
help make a diagnosis. In these cases, overt medical evidence complements the report of the patient. However, for psychiatric disorders, this 
is impossible at present. Doctors must diagnose psychiatric disorders 
based only on their patient’s self-report of their symptoms, their own 
observation of the patient, or the observations of others. Therefore, 
psychiatrists and psychologists have developed a way to categorize psychiatric disorders that involves looking at groups of symptoms that 
people have.
How Do Doctors Validate Psychological or Psychiatric Diagnoses?
To validate a psychiatric or psychological diagnosis, psychologists and 
psychiatrists examine data such as the degree to which trained individuals 

7
agree on the diagnosis, the degree to which the disorder runs in families 
(including adoption studies to determine the relative impact of biology 
vs. environment), any neuroimaging and neurochemistry studies, and the 
degree to which people who have the problem experience distress. This 
has been done sufficiently for adult ADHD.
How Do We Know That ADHD Is a “Real” Diagnosis?
Sufficient scientific evidence has accumulated over the past several 
decades leading toward the finding that ADHD is a real, significant, 
distressing, interfering, and legitimate medical problem. This includes 
evidence that ADHD can be reliably diagnosed in adults and that the 
diagnosis meets standards of diagnostic validity similar to those of 
other psychiatric diagnoses. Accordingly, core symptoms in adulthood 
include impairments in attention, inhibition, and self-regulation. 
These core symptoms lead to impairments in adulthood, such as the 
following:
■ Poor school and work performance (e.g., difficulty with organization 
or planning, becoming easily bored, deficient sustained attention to 
reading and paperwork, procrastination, poor time management, 
impulsive decision making)
■ Impaired interpersonal skills (e.g., problems with friendships, poor 
follow-through on commitments, poor listening skills, difficulty 
with intimate relationships)
■ Behavior problems (e.g., individuals with ADHD are less educated 
than predicted based on ability, difficulties with financial 
management, trouble organizing one’s home, chaotic routines)
There is further evidence for the validity of ADHD as a diagnosis from 
medication treatment studies, genetic studies that include adoption and 
family studies, and neuroimaging and neurochemistry research.
Children with ADHD Do Grow Up
It is estimated that between 1% and 5% of adults have ADHD. This is 
consistent with estimates that ADHD affects 2% to 9% of school-age 
children, and follow-up studies of children diagnosed with ADHD show 
that impairing ADHD symptoms persist into adulthood (beyond adolescence) in 30% to 80% of diagnosed children.

It is estimated that between 1% and 5% of adults have ADHD. This is 
consistent with estimates that ADHD affects 2% to 9% of school-age 
children, and follow-up studies of children diagnosed with ADHD show 
that impairing ADHD symptoms persist into adulthood (beyond adolescence) in 30% to 80% of diagnosed children.

8
Conclusion
Now that you have learned about adult ADHD and this treatment program, you are ready to begin! You have already taken a big step by purchasing this workbook and making the decision to participate in this 
program. Let’s get started!

9
OVERVIEW
This chapter will provide information about how this program was 
developed to address the specific concerns of adults with ADHD who 
are treated with medications. The chapter will also provide information 
about the success of the program in addressing these concerns and additional information about exactly what the program will entail.
GOALS
■ To learn how this program was developed
■ To learn about the concerns of medication-treated adults 
with ADHD
■ To understand the success rate of the program so far
■ To understand what the program will involve
This treatment program is meant to be completed with the assistance 
of a cognitive-behavioral therapist. The treatment was developed by the 
Massachusetts General Hospital’s Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Program. 
It was based on the clinical experience of the authors, input from adults 
with ADHD, and published works on treatment for adults with ADHD 
(e.g., Barkley, 1998; Hallowell, 1995; Mayes, 1998; McDermott, 2000; 
Nadeau, 1995). It is designed for individuals who have been diagnosed 
Overview of This Treatment 
Program for ADHD in Adulthood CHAPTER 2

10
with ADHD, have been on medications for ADHD, and have found a 
stable medication regimen. The strategies may be useful for adults with 
ADHD who cannot take medications, but we have only tested it for individuals who were already taking medications.
How Was the Program Developed?
Clinical Experience of the Authors
The program was developed by a group of psychologists at Massachusetts 
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School after treating patients with 
ADHD in our clinic using cognitive-behavioral therapy. From this perspective, it was originally developed based on our clinical experience, the 
general principles of cognitive-behavioral therapy, and published clinical 
guidelines for working with adult patients with ADHD.
Input from Adults with ADHD
Patients with ADHD also gave input to the development of the treatment program. One of us interviewed a group of patients with ADHD 
who had been taking medications about the types of problems they were 
experiencing and what they felt would be helpful regarding cognitivebehavioral treatment.
The most frequently discussed problems among adult patients with 
ADHD who had been taking medicines were (1) organizing and planning, (2) distractibility, and (3) associated anxiety and depression. Other 
concerns included problems with procrastination, anger management, 
and communication issues.
Organizing and Planning
Problems with organizing and planning involve difficulties figuring out 
the logical, discrete steps to complete tasks that seem overwhelming. 
For many clients, this difficulty leads to giving up, procrastination, 
anxiety, and feelings of incompetence and underachievement. For 
example, several of our clients who were underemployed or unemployed had never completed thorough job searches, so they did not have

the logical, discrete steps to complete tasks that seem overwhelming. 
For many clients, this difficulty leads to giving up, procrastination, 
anxiety, and feelings of incompetence and underachievement. For 
example, several of our clients who were underemployed or unemployed had never completed thorough job searches, so they did not have 
a job, were working in much lower-paying positions than they could 
have been, or were not working at a job that would lead to appropriate 
employment.

11
Distractibility
The problems with distractibility involved problems in work or school. 
Many of our clients have reported that they do not complete tasks because 
other, less important things get in the way. Examples might include sitting down at one’s computer to work on a project, but constantly going 
on the Internet to look up certain websites or browsing social networking 
sites. One student in our program told us that whenever he sat down to 
work on his thesis, he would find another place in his apartment to clean 
(even though it was already basically clean enough).
Mood Problems (Associated Anxiety and Depression)
Secondary to core ADHD symptoms, many of our clients have mood 
problems. These problems involve worry about events in their lives, and 
sadness regarding either real or perceived underachievement. Many individuals with ADHD report a strong sense of frustration about tasks that 
they do not finish, or do not do as well as they feel that they could have.
Has This Program Been Successful?
Yes! In our study of this treatment, we found that people who completed 
this program in addition to taking their medications did significantly better than people who stayed on their medications but did not receive this 
treatment (Safren, Otto, Sprich, Winett, Wilens, & Biederman, 2005).
We conducted a “randomized controlled trial” to find these results. 
Randomized controlled trials are a primary way researchers test whether 
treatments work. They are called randomized because patients entering 
the study randomly receive either the treatment or a control condition. In 
our study we only took in patients with ADHD who were being treated 
with medications and still had significant problems. These patients were 
randomized to either getting the treatment described in this book or 
no additional treatment. (All patients continued taking their prescribed 
medications.)
In this study, the people who got the treatment had significantly lower 
symptoms of ADHD after the treatment. This was evaluated by an 
independent assessor who did not know whether the participants got 
the treatment or not, and by the self-report of participants who completed written questionnaires about their symptoms. According to these 

12
assessments, patients who went through the program experienced about 
a 50% decrease in symptoms, and those who did not had negligible 
changes.
Later, we conducted a larger five-year study funded by a grant from the 
National Institute of Mental Health (to Dr. Safren), also using the first 
version of our treatment manual. This study involved comparing the 
treatment in this manual plus continued medications to a comparison 
treatment (relaxation plus educational support) plus continued medications (Safren, Sprich, Mimiaga, Surman, Knouse, Groves, & Otto, 2010). 
Eighty-six adults with ADHD participated in this study. We found that 
participants receiving cognitive-behavioral treatment achieved lower

treatment in this manual plus continued medications to a comparison 
treatment (relaxation plus educational support) plus continued medications (Safren, Sprich, Mimiaga, Surman, Knouse, Groves, & Otto, 2010). 
Eighty-six adults with ADHD participated in this study. We found that 
participants receiving cognitive-behavioral treatment achieved lower 
scores on measures of ADHD compared with participants receiving the 
comparison treatment, and there were more responders in the cognitivebehavioral treatment group than the comparison group. This means that 
more people in the cognitive-behavioral treatment group were considered 
significantly improved than in the comparison group. These gains were 
maintained at six- and 12-month follow-up.
What Will the Program Entail?
Regular Meetings with a Therapist and Home Practice
The treatment involves regular meetings with a cognitive-behavioral therapist and home practice assignments. We have found that weekly sessions 
work best. By having weekly sessions, you have a chance to practice the 
skills discussed in the treatment every week. Also, there is a relatively short 
period of time between sessions so that any problems with follow-through 
can be solved, and any questions about the approach can be answered. 
When we have conducted sessions every other week, clients reported that 
it was difficult because they would forget what they were supposed to be 
doing on their own.
The treatment is different than traditional psychotherapy. In fact, in some 
ways it is more like taking a course than being in supportive psychotherapy. Each session will have an agenda, and each session will have an associated home practice assignment.

13
Practice Is Essential
The program involves practicing outside of the sessions: There are no two 
ways about it! We have found that many clients have tried similar strategies in the past but have had difficulties integrating this practice into their 
daily lives. In other words, the tendency to be distractible and forgetful 
can get in the way of treatment. We will work with you to “set in” new 
habits that you can keep with you over the years
You will need to practice these new skills long enough for them to 
become a habit—for them to be easy to use and remember.
Do Not Quit
You may be tempted to quit, but not at the beginning when things will 
be exciting and new and therefore more interesting. People typically do 
not quit at the beginning. The middle period can sometimes be the hardest. This is when the novelty wears off, but people have not practiced the 
skills long enough for them to become habits. Many people show some 
improvement at the beginning, enough so they start to think that they do 
not need to use the skills. In this case, people may quit (because it is no 
longer new and interesting, and is not yet an easy habit), but then they 
relapse back to having problems, and then think, “I tried to change and 
I could not do it.” Hence, the cycle of negative emotions and continued 
ADHD symptoms persists.
Do not succumb to this temptation!
This may be the hardest part of the treatment program. The key to getting 
better is to stay on track and stick with the program long enough for it to 
become easier. There will be ups and downs over the course of treatment. 
But when there is a “down,” this is definitely not the time to quit. Rather, 
this is the time to learn from the things that led up to the setback, and

better is to stay on track and stick with the program long enough for it to 
become easier. There will be ups and downs over the course of treatment. 
But when there is a “down,” this is definitely not the time to quit. Rather, 
this is the time to learn from the things that led up to the setback, and 
figure out how to handle them in the future. This is extremely important.
Setbacks are a major part of progress. You need to have setbacks 
and learn to handle them in order to reduce the likelihood of 
future setbacks!

14
The final period is likely to be easier, but it can also entail challenges. Once 
you start seeing improvements, you will be faced with the challenge of 
continuing to invest some time and energy in maintaining these systems 
and skills even though things are going better. We have found that some 
people, once they are doing better, feel less motivated to keep using the 
coping skills. If things are bad, then there is more motivation because people feel that the need to “get out of the hole.” But when things are going 
well, some people lose their motivation—and this can lead to setbacks.
The Three Modules of the Program
Organization and Planning
The first part of the treatment involves organization and planning skills. 
This includes skills such as the following:
■ Learning to effectively and consistently use a calendar
■ Learning to effectively and consistently use a task list
■ Working on effective problem-solving skills, such as breaking down 
tasks into steps and choosing a best solution for a problem when no 
solution is ideal
■ Developing a triage system for mail and papers
■ Developing organizational systems for papers, electronic files, and 
other items
Managing Distractibility
The second part of treatment involves managing distractibility. Skills 
include the following:
■ Determining a reasonable length of time that you can expect to 
focus on boring or difficult tasks, and then breaking tasks down into 
chunks that match this length of time
■ Using a timer, cues, and other techniques (e.g., distractibility delay)
Cognitive Restructuring (Adaptive Thinking)
The third part of treatment involves learning to think about problems and 
stressors in the most adaptive way possible. This includes the following:
■ Positive “self-coaching”
■ Learning how to identify and dispute negative and/or unhelpful 
thoughts

15
■ Learning how to look at situations rationally, and therefore make 
rational choices about the best possible solutions
■ Learning how to identify and change “overly positive” thinking 
patterns
Procrastination
An optional additional module exists for procrastination. We include 
this because even though most of the previous modules do relate to 
procrastination, some people require extra help in this area. This 
module therefore focuses on how to use the skills above to help with 
procrastination.
Monitoring Progress
before starting this program, your therapist will likely have done a diagnostic interview to establish whether or not you have ADHD. Part of the 
treatment approach described in this workbook involves regularly monitoring your improvement. Because, unlike many medical illnesses, we do 
not have a blood test for symptom severity, we need to use the next best 
thing, which is the Adult ADHD Self-Report Scale (ASRS) Symptom 
Checklist (https://www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/ncs/ftpdir/adhd/18Q_
ASRS_English.pdf). Your therapist will give you a copy to fill out at the

treatment approach described in this workbook involves regularly monitoring your improvement. Because, unlike many medical illnesses, we do 
not have a blood test for symptom severity, we need to use the next best 
thing, which is the Adult ADHD Self-Report Scale (ASRS) Symptom 
Checklist (https://www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/ncs/ftpdir/adhd/18Q_
ASRS_English.pdf). Your therapist will give you a copy to fill out at the 
start of each session.
Agendas for Treatment Sessions
To ensure that important material is covered, you and your therapist will 
set an agenda for each therapy session.
One potential pitfall with modular treatment is that not everything can 
be covered at once. Although the treatment approach is offered one module at a time, you may have areas of difficulty that will not be addressed 
until future sessions. This is an issue that is sometimes frustrating for 
clients. The program typically starts with the development of a calendar 
and task list system. That module also involves learning organization and 
planning skills. The next module targets distractibility. People sometimes 
have problems with the first module because they get easily distracted, 
but distractibility is not covered until the next module. We ask that you 
do your best, but we also realize that you will not have learned all the necessary skills until the end of the treatment program.

16
Repeating Information
There are many areas of the treatment where we repeat key information. 
We do this because repetition is the best way to learn new information. 
Each module contains new information and also contains information 
from previous modules that is important to review.
Remembering to Take Medication
For some people with ADHD, taking medication every day, sometimes 
more than once a day, can be difficult. Symptoms of ADHD such as 
distractibility or poor organization may interfere, causing you to forget 
to take all of your prescribed doses or to have difficulty developing a 
structured routine for taking medication. This treatment will help you 
prioritize taking medication and will provide you with opportunities to 
work with a therapist and try to resolve any difficulties you have taking 
medications. Each week you will discuss factors leading to missed doses 
and will try to come up with a plan to avoid this in the future.

17
OVERVIEW
This chapter will assist you in working with a spouse, partner, or family 
member to better manage your ADHD symptoms. As has been discussed 
earlier, this treatment program is best done with the aid of a therapist who 
is familiar with cognitive-behavioral therapy. We therefore recommend 
that you and your family member meet with the therapist for one session 
to go over the material presented in the first two chapters, and to deal 
with any other information that may be pertinent.
NOTE: This session can take place at any time between Sessions 2 and 6. 
The primary goals are to provide information about the treatment to your 
family member and to make sure that everyone is “on the same page” about 
the treatment. You can talk with your therapist about what makes the most 
sense in terms of the treatment and you can talk with your family member 
about his or her schedule and then plan accordingly.
Involving a family member in treatment will enable you to do the following:
■ To gain support as you complete treatment
■ To decrease tension in your relationship related to ADHD

CHAPTER 3

18
GOALS
■ To provide education about ADHD
■ To provide an overview of the cognitive-behavioral model of the 
continuation of ADHD into adulthood
■ To discuss organization and planning techniques
■ To discuss techniques for coping with distractibility
■ To discuss adaptive thinking techniques
■ To discuss involvement of your family member in the treatment
■ To discuss ways that your family member can help and support the 
treatment
Symptom Severity Scale
As you have been doing each week, complete the ASRS Symptom 
Checklist at the start of your therapy session, and share this information 
with your therapist.
Score:  Date: 
Medication Adherence
Record your prescribed dosage of medication and indicate the number of 
doses you missed. Review triggers for missed doses such as distractibility, 
running out of medication, or thoughts about not wanting/needing to 
take medication.
Prescribed doses per week:______________
Doses missed this week: _______________
Triggers for missed doses:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________

19
Review of Previously Presented Material
The information presented in the earlier chapters of this workbook can be 
shared with your family member. This information lays the groundwork 
for the remaining sessions. We recommend that this be discussed with 
your cognitive-behavioral therapist, who can answer questions that your 
family member might have.
Monitoring Progress
Each week we monitor progress by completing the ASRS Symptom 
Checklist. We find that this is helpful to identify areas that are most 
problematic and areas that should be targeted for additional work. We 
also sometimes ask the partner or family member to complete the ASRS 
Symptom Checklist as a secondary way to report on progress. If you are 
willing, we would like to have your family member complete one, and we 
can compare ratings to see if problematic areas are similar.
Practice
■ Continue to discuss ways in which your family member can provide 
support while you are in treatment.
■ Read over the materials for the next session.



Organizing and Planning

MODULE 1



23
OVERVIEW
This chapter will help you come up with goals for therapy that are both 
specific and within your control. In addition, you will learn the foundational skills that will allow you to get started with your own personalized 
task list and calendar systems.
GOALS
■ To understand the severity of your initial symptoms as a basis for 
tracking treatment progress
■ To discuss realistic goals
■ To learn about the modular approach to treatment, and the 
importance of practice, motivation, and staying with it
■ To be introduced to using task list and calendar systems
■ To get started with task list and calendar systems
Symptom Checklist
At the start of each session, your therapist will give you a copy of the ASRS 
Symptom Checklist to complete. This checklist lists each of the diagnostic symptoms of ADHD, so that you can rate yourself. Each week of treatment will involve targeting specific symptoms from this assessment. As 
you go through the treatment, you should expect to see a gradual decline 
The Foundation: Organizing and 
Planning Skills CHAPTER 4

24
in symptom severity. If there are specific sets of symptoms that do not 
seem to be changing, these are areas on which you should focus.
Tracking your symptoms on a weekly basis can also help you become 
more aware of these difficulties. Being aware that these are symptoms 
of ADHD, doing this self-assessment on a weekly basis, and tracking 
the changes can also be helpful on its own. This awareness can help you 
remember to use the skills that you will be learning in the sessions that 
follow.
Complete the ASRS Symptom Checklist now. Pay particular attention to 
the items that have the highest ratings, as these should be targets for treatment. Then fill in your score and today’s date in the lines here:
Score:  Date: 
Medication Adherence
Record your prescribed dosage of medication and indicate the number of 
doses you missed. Review triggers for missed doses such as distractibility, 
running out of medication, or thoughts about not wanting/needing to 
take medication. Repeat this exercise before every therapy session and 
share it with your therapist so that it can be discussed in therapy.
Prescribed doses per week: ______________
Doses missed this week: ________________
Triggers for missed doses:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
Goals for Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for ADHD
You have just completed a checklist of the symptoms that are typical 
of ADHD in adults. We find that reviewing this list can also help you 
think about individual goals that you might have regarding which types 
of problems most affect you. Additionally, it might help you think about 
how they actually interfere in your life.

You have just completed a checklist of the symptoms that are typical 
of ADHD in adults. We find that reviewing this list can also help you 
think about individual goals that you might have regarding which types 
of problems most affect you. Additionally, it might help you think about 
how they actually interfere in your life.

25
Part of getting started on this course of cognitive-behavioral therapy 
(CBT) for ADHD is making sure you have realistic goals for the treatment. Realistic goals are things that you can control.
Realism and Controllability
You might be thinking that a long-term (or medium-term) goal of 
yours is to get a better job. This is a great goal, and we believe the 
skills described in this workbook can help you increase the chances 
of getting a better job. However, the outcome of getting a better job 
is dependent on lots of other factors that you do not directly control 
(e.g., the economy and the availability of the types of jobs you want). 
A realistic goal would therefore be to figure out what steps are necessary to improve the chances of getting a better job, and then acting on 
these steps.
There are likely areas related to ADHD that are also preventing you 
from getting a better job. Steps related to overcoming these might 
include figuring out an effective job search process, improving your 
organizational skills at work, and improving your productivity. These 
are issues that the treatment can help with because we can directly 
control them.
Questions to Help Come Up with Goals
The following questions may help you come up with goals regarding your 
treatment:
■ What made you decide to start this treatment now?
■ What types of things would you like to be different regarding how 
you approach tasks?
■ What are some issues that others have noticed about how you 
approach things?
■ If you did not have problems with ADHD, what do you think 
would be different in your life?
In Figure 4.1, write down your goals for CBT. There are also columns 
for controllability, and whether the goal is a short- or long-term one. 
For controllability, write down how much control you think you have 
over this goal even if the ADHD symptoms were gone (0% represents no 

26
control; 100% represents complete control). Also indicate whether this is 
a short-term or long-term goal.
We ask you to rate controllability (and this should be done with a therapist) so that you can gain a realistic appraisal of your goals for CBT. 
For example, a goal might be to move to a new house. However, there 
are many factors involved in moving to a new house, such as the state 
of the housing market in your area, and whether you get approved for 
a mortgage quickly. Hence, we prefer to have a related goal that is more 
controllable—for example, do the tasks necessary to optimize the chances 
of moving to a new house.
Figure 4.1
Goals for cognitive-behavioral therapy

are many factors involved in moving to a new house, such as the state 
of the housing market in your area, and whether you get approved for 
a mortgage quickly. Hence, we prefer to have a related goal that is more 
controllable—for example, do the tasks necessary to optimize the chances 
of moving to a new house.
Figure 4.1
Goals for cognitive-behavioral therapy

27
Re-review the goals, and the controllability ratings. Ask yourself if there 
are specific areas that you can control about each situation, and if there 
are specific areas that are beyond your control.
Information About the Modular Approach to Treatment
As we have discussed, this treatment is modular. In other words, it is designed 
so that each skill builds upon previously learned skills. You will be learning 
one technique at a time. As you begin this treatment program, there are several things to keep in mind about how the treatment is structured.
The Therapy Is Active
First, due to difficulties known to be associated with ADHD, the therapy 
will be especially active, almost like taking a course. Each session will have 
an agenda that you and your therapist will discuss at the beginning.
The Therapy Requires Practice Outside of Sessions
Each session will involve a review of the things you have already learned 
and are working on, as well as discussing new coping strategies and trying 
them out for the next week. The more you are able to do this, the better 
the results you will see.
The Therapy Works on One Skill at a Time
This means that you will have areas of difficulty that are not addressed right 
away. For example, the first module is on organizing and planning. The 
second is on distractibility. Of course, organizing and planning things are 
much easier if you do not become distracted. Likewise, if we started with 
distractibility, it would be difficult to figure out what you were getting distracted from if you are not organized. Therefore, it is important to realize 
that only one thing at a time can be changed, and the key is to practice 
things long enough so that you can really tell if they will be helpful to you.
Practice Makes Perfect
You are about to start a treatment for problems that involve difficulties with follow-through. Some or all of these skills may seem difficult. 
This is why you will be doing the treatment with a therapist and not on 
your own, and this is also why it is critical to know right from the start 

28
how important it is to practice these new skills. Remember the model of 
cognitive-behavioral therapy for ADHD that is presented in Figure 1.2 
in Chapter 1 of this workbook. Many people with ADHD never get a 
chance to learn coping skills because they quit practicing a skill before 
they have practiced it enough for it to become a habit!
Motivation Is Key
If you participate in this program, there will certainly be challenges. 
It can be difficult to maintain your motivation.
Your therapist will be working with you to help you understand exactly 
how each skill may be useful for you. Your therapist will also be working 
to make sure that you are working on goals that are important for you. Be 
sure to give your therapist feedback if there are times when you are not 
clear about how a particular skill might be useful for you, or if you are 
feeling that your therapist does not understand your goals. By doing this, 
you can get the most out of the treatment program.

to make sure that you are working on goals that are important for you. Be 
sure to give your therapist feedback if there are times when you are not 
clear about how a particular skill might be useful for you, or if you are 
feeling that your therapist does not understand your goals. By doing this, 
you can get the most out of the treatment program.
Skill: Using a Calendar and Task List
Calendar and task list systems are the foundation of organization. These 
are absolutely necessary. Although there are other things you also need in 
order to be organized, these things are critical.
We consider it akin to eating for health maintenance. To maintain 
your health, you need to be able to eat. However, there are many other 
things that you also need to do to maintain your health, such as going 
to the doctor, taking medicine if you get an infection, and so on. Eating 
is a necessary—but not sufficient—requirement for health. We believe 
that calendar and task list systems are necessary—but not sufficient—
requirements for being organized.
Using the Calendar and Task List Together
The calendar system and task list systems can be personalized, even 
though we give specific recommendations. Many individuals report that 
they have tried to use a calendar system in the past but it has not worked, 
or they did not keep up with it. Remember, the goal of this treatment is to 

29
try things long enough for them to become automatic habits. Every session from here on out involves tasks that build on the use of the calendar 
and task list system. These two items can be used together.
■ The task list will contain information that you need but that is not 
tied to a specific date. The task list should replace having random 
pieces of paper that can be easily lost.
■ The calendar is your key to appointments. When using the calendar 
with the task list, you may place items from the task list onto 
specific days or times.
Rules for the Calendar and Task List
1. The calendar and task list system replaces ALL pieces of paper.
■ Pieces of paper just get lost.
■ Instead of keeping an appointment slip, a business card, or 
anything like this, copy the information onto the task list or 
enter it directly on your calendar.
2. Phone messages from voice mail or other places go on the task list.
■ Log every phone message (from voice mail and so forth) on the 
task list as a to-do item.
■ If you date when you have completed the task, you will then 
have a record of having done it in case anyone asks you about it 
in the future.
3. All appointments go on the calendar.
■ No appointment slips that can easily get lost!
4. All tasks must go on the task list.
■ The task list is something that will be further developed in 
future chapters. This is a key component of the program.
■ Task list items should be looked at EVERY DAY, and revised 
accordingly.
5. Do not obsess about trying to get a perfect system.
■ Many individuals want to have the perfect calendar and task list 
systems. Do not fall into this trap! This will just result in not 
having any systems.
■ If you cannot decide on the “best” system, then just use a simple 
calendar and task list system.
■ Remember, it’s important to give your system a fair shot! This 
means keeping one system for at least three months, long 
enough to get used to it.

systems. Do not fall into this trap! This will just result in not 
having any systems.
■ If you cannot decide on the “best” system, then just use a simple 
calendar and task list system.
■ Remember, it’s important to give your system a fair shot! This 
means keeping one system for at least three months, long 
enough to get used to it.

30
6. Use a system that is within your comfort zone.
■ There are many, many options for different calendar and task list 
systems—including paper systems, applications on smartphones 
or tablets, and multiple computerized applications. Many of our 
clients ask us which is the “best” system, and this is not really a 
question that we can easily answer. The question for you to ask 
yourself is this: “What is the best system for me?”
If you are not proficient at computers or smartphone applications, you can 
always try to become proficient at these things at the end of this treatment. 
We recommend, however, that this be a separate goal from this program.
Potential Pitfalls
It is important to remember that learning any new skill takes practice 
and it takes time. You may not be used to writing down appointments or 
carrying around your task list and calendar systems. Be aware of thoughts 
that may sabotage your success down the road, such as these:
“I don’t have room in my bag for my tablet or smartphone.”
“I’ve never been an organized person; why start now?”
“If I write down my appointments and assignments, I will then be responsible 
for them.”
In later chapters you will be learning ways to manage these interfering 
thoughts. For now, try to keep focused on your reasons for beginning this 
program, the goals you hope to achieve, and the sense of accomplishment 
you will feel for taking positive steps in your life.
Practice
■ Create an organizational system with a calendar and a task list 
following the rules above.
■ Put all appointments on the calendar and start ONE master 
task list.
■ Read over the materials for the next session.

31
OVERVIEW
The main focus of this chapter is to teach you how to manage multiple 
tasks. It is important for you to remember that practice makes perfect.
Although these techniques may seem unfamiliar at first, over time they 
will become more automatic. Even if you feel frustrated, stick with the 
techniques until they become habits.
GOALS
■ To continue to monitor your progress
■ To review your use of the calendar and task list
■ To learn how to manage multiple tasks
■ To learn how to prioritize tasks
■ To problem solve regarding any anticipated difficulties using this 
technique
■ To identify exercises for home practice

CHAPTER 5 Organization of Multiple Tasks

32
Review of Symptom Checklist
As you have been doing each week, complete the ASRS Symptom 
Checklist at the start of your therapy session, and share this information 
with your therapist.
Score:  Date: 
Review of Medication Adherence
As you have been doing each week, record your prescribed dosage of medication and indicate the number of doses you missed. Review triggers 
for missed doses such as distractibility, running out of medication, or 
thoughts about not wanting/needing to take medication.
Prescribed doses per week:
Doses missed this week:
Triggers for missed doses:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
Review of Previous Chapters
Each week you should examine your progress in implementing the 
skills that you have learned so far in this treatment. It is important to 
acknowledge the successes you have achieved and to try to resolve any 
difficulties.
To review, the tools for organization and planning are as follows:
■ Use of calendar for managing appointments
■ Use of task list system
Remember, having a good calendar and task list system is NECESSARY 
(but not sufficient) to getting organized.

33
If you have not yet decided on systems to use to keep track of your 
appointments and tasks, this should be your top priority. Problem-solving skills are covered in future sessions, but before that, try to solve any 
problems you have getting started with your systems. Remember: For this 
approach to be successful, you need to have the proper tools!
If you have initiated the use of calendar and task list systems, review the 
specifics:
■ How will you remember to look at your calendar every day?
■ How will you remember to look at your task list every day? (We find 
that picking a time every day is the best—for example, when you 
feed your dog, after you brush your teeth, or while you are having 
your morning coffee or breakfast.)
Remember, just because you have a task list, it doesn’t mean that you have 
to complete all of the items on the list immediately! It is simply a tool that 
is going to help you become organized and avoid forgetting things that 
are not on the list.
The calendar and task lists are building blocks for the rest of the 
treatment program. Make sure to plan a strategy to look at them 
EVERY DAY!
Managing Multiple Tasks
When looking at the task list and the calendar, you may have noticed that 
we often need to manage multiple tasks at one time.
When you have ADHD, it can become difficult to decide which task is 
most important. Even if you have decided that a particular task is important, it is often difficult to stick with it until it is completed.
In the following exercise, you will learn a concrete strategy to help you 
decide which tasks are most important. This technique is one example of 
how you can “force yourself” to organize tasks, even though it is difficult 
for people with ADHD to process this type of information.

most important. Even if you have decided that a particular task is important, it is often difficult to stick with it until it is completed.
In the following exercise, you will learn a concrete strategy to help you 
decide which tasks are most important. This technique is one example of 
how you can “force yourself” to organize tasks, even though it is difficult 
for people with ADHD to process this type of information.

34
Master List Versus Daily List
It is important to have both a “master list” that holds all of the tasks that 
need to be completed, in general, and a “daily list” of tasks that you are 
actually hoping to complete on a particular day. You can divide the list 
up into different sections, such as home projects and work projects, if 
desired.
All tasks should remain on the master list until they have been completed. 
If you do not complete a task on the daily list that day, move it to the next 
day’s list. Many electronic systems allow items to be assigned a particular 
date, and the item will automatically move to the following day if it has 
not been checked off as having been completed. This can also be done 
using a paper system.
Skill: Prioritizing
When you are faced with a number of tasks that you must do, it is important to have a clear strategy for prioritizing which tasks are most important, so that the most important tasks are sure to get completed. The best 
way that we know of to do this is to rate each task.
We find that people like to complete the tasks that are easier first. This 
can be problematic because the easier tasks are often the tasks that are 
not as important. When we do this, we get the feeling that we are getting 
things accomplished, but we find that we are never making progress on 
our important goals.
Skill: The A, B, C’s
List all of your tasks. Then assign an “A,” “B,” or “C” rating to each task:
■ “A” Tasks: These are the tasks of highest importance. They must be 
completed in the short term (like today or tomorrow).
■ “B” Tasks: These are lower-importance, longer-term tasks. Some 
portions should be completed in the short term, but other portions 
may take longer.
■ “C” Tasks: These are the tasks of lowest importance. They may be 
more attractive and easier to do, but they are not as important.

35
Work with your therapist to generate a task list, and discuss ratings for 
each item. Be very careful not to rate too many items as “A”!
This rating strategy can be applied both to the master list and to the daily 
list. In the case of the master list, you can use it to decide which items are 
most important and need to go on that day’s list. In the case of the daily 
list, you would use it to decide which item to do first, which to do second, 
and so on.
You can see that the priority ratings are not static. For example, a task that 
needs to be completed in the distant future may be placed on your master 
list, and you might rate it as a “C.” However, as the deadline approaches, 
you may change the rating to a “B” and then finally an “A” if you have 
not yet completed it. Sometimes, events will occur that may cause you to 
modify your ratings (e.g., an email from your boss asking about the report 
you were supposed to write).
Skill: Using This Technique
You can now add this technique to the toolbox of skills you are developing to combat your ADHD symptoms. In addition to making a “to 
do” list for each day, you should now assign a rating of “A,” “B,” or “C”

modify your ratings (e.g., an email from your boss asking about the report 
you were supposed to write).
Skill: Using This Technique
You can now add this technique to the toolbox of skills you are developing to combat your ADHD symptoms. In addition to making a “to 
do” list for each day, you should now assign a rating of “A,” “B,” or “C” 
to each task. You should do all of the “A” tasks before doing any of the 
“B” tasks! This may be hard for you, but it is very important! It will 
help you to make sure that you complete the tasks that are important 
to you.
Use this technique every day. Get in the habit of pausing to assess what 
you need to do and to carefully decide what you should start with, what 
you should do second, and so on. By practicing this technique regularly, 
you will ensure that the most important tasks get completed.
Potential Pitfalls
You may be feeling that we are asking you to do a lot, but don’t get discouraged! You are trying to learn some new skills, and it will take some 
time before the skills become habits. As you become more accustomed to 
using your task list, you will learn more about how much is realistic for 
you to expect to do in one day.

36
At this point, if you find that you are not finishing all of the items on your 
list, simply re-rate them the next day. In later chapters, you may want to 
use some problem-solving techniques if you are finding that you are consistently not finishing the most important items on your list.
Remember, at this point, you are just trying to get in the habit of using 
the task list.
Practice
■ Put all appointments on the calendar and review the task list on a 
daily basis.
■ Use and look at the task list and calendar EVERY DAY!
■ Select items from the master list to put on the daily task list.
■ Rate each task as an “A,” “B,” or “C” task.
■ Practice doing all of the “A” tasks before the “B” tasks and all of the 
“B” tasks before the “C” tasks.
■ Carry over tasks that are not completed from the previous day to the 
next day’s list.
An example of a task list is provided here. See if you like this format for 
your task list.

37
Sample Task List
Priority 
Rating Task Date Put on List
Date 
Completed
A
A
.
.
B
.
.
.
.
.
.
C
.
.
.
.
.
.
Note: This format can be used for a paper system. Many electronic systems allow you to assign priority ratings as 
well. You should use the system that best fits your needs.



39
OVERVIEW
The main skills that you will learn in this chapter are how to solve problems 
effectively and how to take a task that, at first, seems overwhelming and 
break it down into manageable steps. The problem-solving techniques are 
adapted from cognitive-behavioral interventions that focus exclusively on 
problem solving (i.e., D’Zurilla, 1986; Nezu, Nezu, Friedman, Faddis, & 
Houts, 1998).
GOALS
■ To continue to monitor your progress
■ To review your use of the calendar and task list, particularly the “A,” 
“B,” “C” priority ratings
■ To learn how to use problem-solving techniques to overcome 
difficulties with task completion or selection of a solution
■ To learn how to break a large task into manageable steps
■ To troubleshoot difficulties with breaking down large tasks into 
manageable steps
■ To identify exercises for home practice
Problem Solving and Managing 
Overwhelming Tasks CHAPTER 6

difficulties with task completion or selection of a solution
■ To learn how to break a large task into manageable steps
■ To troubleshoot difficulties with breaking down large tasks into 
manageable steps
■ To identify exercises for home practice
Problem Solving and Managing 
Overwhelming Tasks CHAPTER 6

40
Review of Symptom Checklist
As you have been doing each week, complete the ASRS Symptom 
Checklist at the start of your therapy session, and share this information 
with your therapist.
Score:  Date: 
Review of Medication Adherence
As you have been doing each week, record your prescribed dosage of medication and indicate the number of doses you missed. Review triggers 
for missed doses such as distractibility, running out of medication, or 
thoughts about not wanting/needing to take medication.
Prescribed doses per week:
Doses missed this week:
Triggers for missed doses:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
Review of Previous Chapters
Each week you should examine your progress in implementing the skills 
you have learned so far in this treatment. It is important to acknowledge 
the successes you have achieved and try to resolve any difficulties.
To review, the tools for organization and planning are as follows:
■ Use of calendar for managing appointments
■ Use of task list system
■ Use of the “A,” “B,” and “C” priority ratings
Skill: Problem-Solving Strategies
This section involves learning to recognize when you are having difficulty completing a task or are becoming overwhelmed and cannot figure out exactly where to start. The reason we call problems “problems” 

41
is because there is no easy solution at hand. Usually any solution has 
serious pros and cons, and this typically can lead to problems like 
procrastination.
Once you recognize that there is a problem, you can use these problemsolving strategies to help. We are going to go over two skills that may seem 
simple but are actually quite powerful: (1) selecting an action plan and 
(2) breaking down an overwhelming task into manageable steps.
Developing an action plan can be helpful when it is difficult to determine 
how to resolve a problem or when the possibility of numerous solutions 
becomes overwhelming. Selecting an action plan involves the five steps in 
problem solving that are listed below.
Skill: Five Steps in Problem Solving
Use these instructions in conjunction with the sheet on page 112.
1. Articulate the problem: Try to describe the problem in as few words 
as possible—one or two sentences at the most. Examples might be 
“I cannot decide whether I should quit my job” or “I cannot decide 
what color to paint my house.”
2. List all possible solutions: In this column, you want to try to figure 
out all of the different solutions—regardless of how realistic they are, 
what the consequences may be, or whether or not they sound outrageous. The idea is to generate a list of as many solutions as possible.
3. List the pros and cons of each solution: Now is the time to realistically appraise each solution. In these columns you want to figure out 
what you think would happen if you picked that solution. List the 
pros (advantages) and cons (disadvantages) of each.
4. Rate each solution: Using the final column, rate the pros and cons of 
the solution on a scale from 1 to 10, with 1 being a terrible solution

3. List the pros and cons of each solution: Now is the time to realistically appraise each solution. In these columns you want to figure out 
what you think would happen if you picked that solution. List the 
pros (advantages) and cons (disadvantages) of each.
4. Rate each solution: Using the final column, rate the pros and cons of 
the solution on a scale from 1 to 10, with 1 being a terrible solution 
and 10 being a great solution. Try to be as objective as possible, but 
include the relative difficulty it would take to carry out this solution. 
For example, if one solution is to assertively say “no” to something, 
you should factor in whether this will be anxiety provoking, as well as 
whether it will be likely to have the desired outcome.
5. Implement the best option: Now that you have rated each option 
on a scale of 1 to 10, review each rating. Look at the one that is rated 
the highest. Determine if this is really the solution that you would 

42
like to pick. If so, use the other skills you have learned in this treatment program (problem solving, organizing, task list, calendar) to 
implement it.
Skill: Breaking Down Large Tasks into Manageable Steps
If a task seems overwhelming, we are much more likely to procrastinate 
and not even attempt to start working on the task. Even if the solution is 
clear, it may just feel easier to put off working on the overwhelming task. 
By learning how to break down large tasks into smaller, more manageable, 
steps, you will increase the likelihood that you will start (and therefore 
eventually complete) important tasks.
Here are the steps for breaking down large tasks into manageable steps:
1. Choose a difficult or complex task from your task list (or the solution that you identified as the best option on the problem-solving 
worksheet from the previous exercise).
2. List the steps that you must complete. You can do this using small 
notecards or plain paper or you can type the steps into your phone, 
tablet, or computer. Ask questions such as, “What is the first thing 
that I would need to do to make this happen?”
3. For each step, make sure that it is manageable. Ask yourself, “Is 
this something that I could realistically complete in one day?” and 
“Is this something that I would want to put off doing?” If the step 
itself is overwhelming, then break that step into smaller steps. Don’t 
be afraid to have more steps.
4. Add each individual step to the master list.
5. Individual steps can be moved to the daily task lists one at a time 
as needed—just put the step or steps that you are hoping to complete on a particular day on the daily list for that day.
6. Individual tasks can be placed on your calendar in specific time 
slots if you find this helpful.

43
Potential Pitfalls
You may find that distractibility interferes with your ability to use these 
skills. Don’t despair! You will learn skills for coping with distractibility in 
the next module. It is important to focus on one set of skills at a time so 
that you can make progress. Try to focus on applying the organizational 
skills as best you can and don’t worry about the issues that you have not 
learned to deal with yet.
Also, you may find that you have some difficulty figuring out how to 
rate the pros, cons, and overall desirability of solutions and deciding how 
many steps make sense for each task. Remember, each new skill will take

skills as best you can and don’t worry about the issues that you have not 
learned to deal with yet.
Also, you may find that you have some difficulty figuring out how to 
rate the pros, cons, and overall desirability of solutions and deciding how 
many steps make sense for each task. Remember, each new skill will take 
lots of practice before it comes naturally to you. The most important 
thing is that you are trying to learn new skills so that you can be more 
effective and organized. Just keep trying! It will get easier as you get used 
to using the new skills.
Practice
■ Continue to put all appointments on the calendar.
■ Put all tasks on the master task list.
■ Use and look at the task list and calendar EVERY DAY!
■ Rate each task as an “A,” “B,” or “C” task.
■ Practice doing all of the “A” tasks before the “B” tasks and all of the 
“B” tasks before the “C” tasks.
■ Carry over tasks that are not completed to the next day’s daily 
task list.
■ Practice using Worksheet 1: Problem Solving: Selection of Action Plan
for at least one item on the task list. Worksheets are located in the 
Appendix at the end of this workbook.
■ Practice breaking down one large task from the task list into 
smaller steps.



45
OVERVIEW
The main goal of this chapter is for you to learn strategies for developing 
organizational systems. You can develop a system to use to deal with mail 
and incoming papers. You can also work on developing any other types 
of organizational systems that might be helpful for you, such as computer 
files, emails, or items in various areas of your home.
For the paper filing system, you will learn both how to “triage” (order the 
importance of and organize) papers as they come in and how to develop 
a filing system so that you can find important papers later when you need 
them. In addition, part of this session involves reviewing the organizational skills that you have learned so far in this module so that you will be 
ready to move on to the module on distractibility next week.
GOALS
■ To continue to monitor your progress
■ To review your use of the calendar and task list
■ To review your use of the “A,” “B,” and “C” priority ratings
■ To review your use of problem solving and breaking down large 
tasks into manageable steps
■ To develop a sorting system for dealing with papers and mail
■ To develop a filing system for important papers
■ To develop other organizational systems that might be useful
■ To identify exercises for home practice and anticipate difficulties 
using these techniques

CHAPTER 7 Organizational Systems

46
Review of Symptom Checklist
As you have been doing each week, complete the ASRS Symptom 
Checklist at the start of your therapy session, and share this information 
with your therapist.
Score: _________________ Date: _________________
Review of Medication Adherence
As you have been doing each week, record your prescribed dosage of medication and indicate the number of doses you missed. List triggers for 
missed doses.
Prescribed doses per week:
Doses missed this week:
Triggers for missed doses:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
Review of Previous Chapters
Each week you should examine your progress in implementing the skills 
that you have learned so far in this treatment. It is important to acknowledge the successes you have achieved and to try to resolve any difficulties.
To review, the tools for organization and planning are as follows:
■ Use of calendar for managing appointments: Discuss any problems 
you are having with using your calendar system.
■ Use of task list system: Review any difficulties you are having with 
using your task list on a daily basis.
■ Use of the “A,” “B,” and “C” priority ratings: Discuss any trouble 
you are having with prioritizing tasks.
■ Use of problem solving (selecting an action plan) and breaking down 
large tasks into small steps: Consider your use of these strategies and 
practice one or both skills using examples from your current task list.

47
Skill: Developing a Sorting System for Mail
Most people find it somewhat difficult to organize mail, important 
papers, and bills. Now that so many things are delivered electronically, 
this problem can apply to emails and electronic files as well as to actual 
papers. Individuals with ADHD can find it overwhelming to deal with 
these issues. This can lead to getting into arguments with people you live 
with, not paying bills on time, and misplacing important documents.
Putting a structured system in place can make this issue feel less overwhelming and more manageable. In this session, you will be learning 
about organizational strategies. Using these strategies may feel unfamiliar 
and may take some additional time to implement in the short term, but 
in the long term, these strategies will make organization much easier.
When you have an organizational system in place, it will decrease difficulties related to poor organization such as feeling overwhelmed or out 
of control, paying late fees, and missing out on opportunities because of 
missed deadlines or lost paperwork.
We recommend involving your spouse, partner, or roommate in helping 
to come up with a system that is mutually agreeable. Worksheet 2: Steps 
for Sorting Mail (in the Appendix) lists some proposed steps.
Paying Bills
One big concern that we frequently hear about from individuals 
with ADHD is that they do not want to pay bills until near the time 
they are due. Some people feel that this will save money because if 
they do this for all of their bills, they will get more interest on the 
money in the bank. Other people feel that they want to wait because 
they want to have their money longer, while others just simply procrastinate around paying bills. Typically, what happens is that people 
who delay paying their bills end up paying them late, incurring fees, 
and losing money.

they do this for all of their bills, they will get more interest on the 
money in the bank. Other people feel that they want to wait because 
they want to have their money longer, while others just simply procrastinate around paying bills. Typically, what happens is that people 
who delay paying their bills end up paying them late, incurring fees, 
and losing money.
The best time to deal with bills and other household task list items 
is right away. Look at your bills and other action items two or three 
times a week so that there are not many things you need to deal with 
at any given time and it will be less overwhelming. However, sometimes it is just as easy to pay the bill right away as it is to file it for 

48
later payment. Using the OHIO (Only Handle It Once) technique 
can save you lots of time, money, and aggravation. Since so many 
bills and other important communications are delivered electronically now, apply this strategy to your email as well as to your paper 
mail. You can develop a strategy for “flagging” items in your email 
that need attention or you can save them to a special folder.
Automatic Payments
You may want to consider setting up automatic payments for bills 
that you need to pay on a regular basis. Payments such as mortgage 
or rent payments, car payments, and student loan payments are typically due on the same day each month and are a consistent dollar 
amount. You can set up a payment with your bank so that a check or 
electronic payment will be sent out automatically each month. For 
other bills, such as credit card bills, that have different amounts due 
each month, you can set up an automatic payment to ensure that 
at least the minimum payment gets sent in each month (so you will 
not incur late charges or damage your credit score). You can then 
set up reminders for yourself to make additional payments during 
the month.
You will need to put a system in place for checking your bank account 
periodically to make sure that there is enough money in your account 
to cover all of the automatic payments that you have set up. You 
may want to integrate this into your calendar system (e.g., make a 
reminder to check your bank balance just before large automatic payments are due each month). In addition, most banks will allow you 
to set up alerts that will text message or email you when the balance 
falls below a certain threshold so that you can add funds.
Even with automatic payments in place, it is likely that there will be 
occasions when bills come in that fall outside of the payment system. For example, medical bills, utility bills (e.g., water bill), parking violations, tax bills, and so on may not easily lend themselves to 
the automatic payment system. You should have a way of dealing 
with these types of bills so that they don’t “fall through the cracks.” 
Perhaps you could write them down on your task list and cross them 
off when they have been paid, or you could put the email reminders 
in a folder and delete them once you have paid the bill.

the automatic payment system. You should have a way of dealing 
with these types of bills so that they don’t “fall through the cracks.” 
Perhaps you could write them down on your task list and cross them 
off when they have been paid, or you could put the email reminders 
in a folder and delete them once you have paid the bill.

49
Skill: Developing an Organizational System
Another common struggle for people with ADHD is keeping papers, 
electronic files, and other items organized. Without systems in place, people lose items, leading to frustration when they need these articles, or miss 
deadlines because they can’t find important information. Furthermore, 
many people find it difficult to throw things away, resulting in a cluttered environment, which makes it even more difficult to find important 
papers or other items. We recommend coming up with organizational 
systems that are both simple and effective. If systems are too complicated, 
they are time consuming to use and people stop using them.
Before coming up with systems, assess where you are having difficulties 
with organization—for example, email, paperwork, computer files, or 
areas of your home are common difficulties. You can think about difficulties that may be caused by the organizational problems. If you are 
in a relationship, these issues can often cause relationship difficulties. As 
noted above, disorganization can lead to financial difficulties in the form 
of wasted money on late payment fees, poor credit scores, and so on. It 
is helpful to start off with an area that is really upsetting for you. Look at 
Worksheet 3: Developing an Organizational System (in the Appendix) to 
help you come up with your own system.
Potential Pitfalls
One potential pitfall is thinking that everything is important. This is just 
not true. Discuss with people who are close to you what items or files 
really need to be saved, and come up with a firm list.
It may take some time in the short term to set up these systems, but it will 
be worth it in the long term! Try to use the strategies of problem solving 
and breaking down large tasks into smaller steps if you feel overwhelmed 
by the prospect of setting up your organizational systems. If you take one 
step at a time, you will be able to complete these tasks.
You may need to discuss your proposed systems with other family members 
before you set them up. It will work much better if everyone is “on the same 
page” about where everything goes. For example, if your spouse is still putting the mail in a big pile on the chair and you are trying to put the important items in a special bin on the kitchen counter, it won’t work very well.

50
Practice
■ Continue to use the calendar every day to record appointments, and 
put new tasks on the task list every day.
■ Use and look at the task list and calendar EVERY DAY!
■ Rate each task as an “A,” “B,” or “C” task.
■ Practice doing all of the “A” tasks before the “B” tasks and all of the 
“B” tasks before the “C” tasks.
■ Carry over tasks that are not completed to the next day’s task list.
■ Practice using Worksheet 1: Problem Solving: Selection of Action Plan
for at least one item on the task list.
■ Practice breaking down one large task from the task list into 
smaller steps.
■ Set up and use the organizational systems developed in session.

MODULE 2



53
OVERVIEW
The main goals of this chapter are for you to (1) figure out how long 
you can hold your attention when doing “dreaded” tasks and (2) start 
implementing the “distractibility delay.” The distractibility delay involves 
timing your ability to stay focused on difficult activities, and also reducing tasks into “chunks” that take approximately that length of time. You 
will also learn how to delay the time when you become distracted from 
the task at hand.
GOALS
■ To continue to monitor your progress
■ To review your use of the calendar, task list, and work from previous 
chapters
■ To learn how to gauge your attention span and develop a plan for 
breaking tasks down into steps that take that length of time
■ To implement the distractibility delay
■ To identify exercises for home practice and anticipate difficulties 
using these techniques
Gauging Your Attention Span 
and Distractibility Delay CHAPTER 8

54
Review of Symptom Checklist
As you have been doing each week, complete the ASRS Symptom 
Checklist at the start of your therapy session, and share this information 
with your therapist.
Score: _________________ Date: _________________
Review of Medication Adherence
As you have been doing each week, record your prescribed dosage of medication and indicate the number of doses you missed. List triggers for 
missed doses.
Prescribed Doses/ per week:
Doses missed this week:
Triggers for missed doses:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
Review of Previous Chapters
Each week you should review your progress implementing skills from 
each of the previous chapters. It is important to acknowledge the successes you have achieved and to try to resolve any difficulties.
To review, here are the tools for organization and planning:
■ Use of calendar for managing appointments: Discuss any problems 
you are having with using your calendar system.
■ Use of task list system: Review any difficulties you are having with 
using your task list on a daily basis.
■ Use of the “A,” “B,” and “C” priority ratings: Discuss any trouble 
you are having with prioritizing tasks.
■ Use of problem solving (selecting an action plan) and breaking down 
large tasks into small steps: Consider your use of these strategies, and 
practice one or both skills using examples from your current task list.

55
Concepts of Attention Span and Distractibility
Commonly clients with ADHD report that they are unable to complete 
tasks because other, less important tasks or distractions get in the way. 
Having a short attention span is part of ADHD. We do not view having 
a low attention span as being associated with low intelligence or lack of 
ability, but rather as representing a need for people with ADHD to use 
extra skills in order to cope.
There are many examples of people who can do extraordinary things 
despite having certain limitations. An extreme example is the musician 
Stevie Wonder. Even though he is blind, he used extra coping skills to 
become a top recording star.
The goal of treatment is to help you function at an optimal level. We will 
use several strategies to help you accomplish this goal.
Skill: Gauging Your Attention Span
There really is no such thing as an exact amount of time representing each 
individual’s attention span. The amount of time that you can work on a

The goal of treatment is to help you function at an optimal level. We will 
use several strategies to help you accomplish this goal.
Skill: Gauging Your Attention Span
There really is no such thing as an exact amount of time representing each 
individual’s attention span. The amount of time that you can work on a 
particular task will depend on many factors, including those related to the 
task (level of complexity) and those related to the individual (how tired you 
are, your level of interest in the task, whether you have eaten recently, and 
so on). What you are trying to gauge with the following exercise is a reasonable amount of time that you can expect yourself to work on a boring 
task. Often, individuals with ADHD will set unrealistic goals for themselves (e.g., “I am going to study for eight hours straight”), and then they 
end up not wanting to start the task because the goal is so overwhelming.
1. The first step is to estimate the length of time that you can work on a 
boring or unattractive task without stopping.
2. The second step is to use the problem-solving skills that you learned 
earlier to break down a task into steps that last this length of time. For 
example, if you think that you can work on a boring task for 10 minutes, break down a larger task (e.g., paying bills) into 10-minute chunks.
During the upcoming week, pick a task you know you have been 
avoiding. Find a way to time yourself while working on the task, 

56
using either a watch or the stopwatch function on your computer or 
smartphone.
■ Figure out a time when you can work on a task that you may find 
boring or difficult or that you have been avoiding.
■ Start timing yourself.
■ Begin working.
■ Keep going as long as you normally would before taking a break, 
or going to the bathroom, or having a strong distraction pop into 
your head.
■ When the urge comes to stop working, record the time.
Repeat the above exercise a couple of times. Average out the amount of 
time that it took before you became distracted. This will be your starting 
attention span time.
Now the trick is to use the problem-solving skills you learned above to 
break down overwhelming or boring tasks into chunks that take approximately the amount of time that you can hold your attention. We recommend taking breaks only in between the chunks.
As you do this more and more, you can try to increase the length of time 
that you are able to focus on boring or unattractive tasks.
It is important not only to schedule specific times to work, but also to 
schedule in breaks. You should time both the work time blocks and the 
breaks so that you don’t end up taking breaks that are too long. For example, it will take a long time to finish a task if you work for 30 minutes and 
then take a three-hour break.
Skill: Distractibility Delay
When you are working on a boring task, it is inevitable that distractions 
will “pop into your head” from time to time and serve as big temptations! Many times the distractions seem to grow in importance as time 
goes on.
The difficult problem here is figuring out whether these distractions are 
actually important OR whether they just become more important because 
(1) they are not the task you had set out to do now or (2) the task you set 
out to do now is not attractive.

will “pop into your head” from time to time and serve as big temptations! Many times the distractions seem to grow in importance as time 
goes on.
The difficult problem here is figuring out whether these distractions are 
actually important OR whether they just become more important because 
(1) they are not the task you had set out to do now or (2) the task you set 
out to do now is not attractive.

57
Is It Important or Just More Attractive?
For example, one of our clients was working on his master’s thesis. He told 
us that whenever he sat down to do his work, he would feel the need to 
clean his apartment. He did not like cleaning, but he would have the urge to 
clean whenever he needed to write. In fact, he got to the point where he felt 
that he just could not work unless everything in his apartment was cleaned 
and in order! Over the years, we have found that other clients who were in 
school would report similar stories. We now believe that the cleanest apartments in the world belong to graduate students who need to do their theses! 
In these cases, cleaning becomes a distraction that grows in importance. 
Even though it is typically not an attractive or important task, it becomes 
much more attractive than the task at hand, which feels overwhelming.
Once you have determined the length of time for which you can hold 
your attention, and you have broken down tasks into steps that take 
about that amount of time, the next step is to try to build skills in delaying distractions.
Distractibility Delay
The distractibility delay is an exercise that can be done in addition to 
the strategies described above. It is similar to an exercise used in anxietydisorder treatments (e.g., Craske & Barlow, 2006) and can be used as a 
strategy for delaying attending to distractions while working on boring 
or unattractive tasks. Clients with ADHD often report that it is difficult 
when a thought pops into their head while they are working on a task. 
They say that it is tempting to simply stop working on their current task 
and shift to working on the new task. They report that this is because 
they worry about forgetting the new task and not completing it at all. The 
reality is that this has been the client’s experience in the past. Thus, the 
distractibility delay can be described as a tool for getting the distractions 
out of your head and getting you to focus on the task at hand. Over time, 
you will gain confidence that these thoughts will not be forgotten and will 
actually get done.
When you start working on a boring or unattractive task, have a piece of 
paper or a note app open in your smartphone or other device. Set a timer 
(you can use your smartphone for this as well) for the agreed-upon length 
of time (e.g., 30 minutes). When a distraction comes into your head, 
write it down, but don’t take action at that time. Instead, return to the

When you start working on a boring or unattractive task, have a piece of 
paper or a note app open in your smartphone or other device. Set a timer 
(you can use your smartphone for this as well) for the agreed-upon length 
of time (e.g., 30 minutes). When a distraction comes into your head, 
write it down, but don’t take action at that time. Instead, return to the 

58
task at hand. When the timer goes off, you can look at the list and decide 
if any of the distracting tasks need to be completed at that time.
Repeat this process until the task is completed (or the portion of the task 
that you have set out to do for the day). Then review the list of distractions and decide if (1) they need to be completed at that time, (2) they 
should be added to your master or daily task list, or (3) they are unimportant and do not need to be completed. Discard the piece of paper (or 
delete the electronic note) at the end of the exercise so that you don’t end 
up with multiple lists.
You can use coping statements to help you return to the task at hand. 
These can include, “I will worry about this later,” “This is not an A-priority task,” or “I will come back to this.”
You can use the distractibility delay in a similar fashion during meetings. 
For example, if you have difficulties with impulsively blurting out comments or questions, bring a notepad or tablet to meetings, write down a 
cue word or phrase, and then try to refocus your attention on the meeting. When there is a break in the conversation or after the meeting, you 
can bring up your question or comment.
Steps for Distractibility Delay
1. Next to you, put a piece of scrap paper or your phone with a blank, 
open “note.”
2. Set your timer for a goal length of time—this should be the length of 
time for which you can usually hold your attention.
3. Start working on the task.
4. When a distraction pops into your head, write it down on your scrap 
paper or on your electronic note, but don’t do anything about it (e.g., 
don’t get up and start making a phone call, putting something away, 
writing a check, and so on).
5. Once you have written down the distraction, you can use coping 
statements such as, “I will worry about it later,” “This is not an A-priority task,” or “I will come back to this.”
6. Return to the original task until you are finished with the “chunk” 
that you have selected.
7. When the timer goes off, take a break. At this point, you can look at 
your distraction list and decide if you want to do these tasks now or 
if you want to do them later.

59
8. When you are finished working for the day, go back to the distraction list. Decide if these are actually important or if they are things 
that became attractive only because they were not the task you were 
working on.
9. If they are in fact important, either do them or add them to your 
task list.
Potential Pitfalls
These skills may seem simple, but they aren’t! Don’t expect yourself to be 
able to use them effectively right away. The extra coping skills that you are 
learning to help you overcome your short attention span and distractibility may take some time to develop. Remember, it took you many years to 
develop your current habits, and it will take some time to develop the more 
effective habits. Stick with this program; it will be worth it in the long run!
Practice
■ Continue to use the calendar every day to record appointments, and

learning to help you overcome your short attention span and distractibility may take some time to develop. Remember, it took you many years to 
develop your current habits, and it will take some time to develop the more 
effective habits. Stick with this program; it will be worth it in the long run!
Practice
■ Continue to use the calendar every day to record appointments, and 
put new tasks on the task list every day.
■ Use and look at the task list and calendar EVERY DAY!
■ Rate each task as an “A,” “B,” or “C” task.
■ Practice doing all of the “A” tasks before the “B” tasks and all of the 
“B” tasks before the “C” tasks.
■ Carry over tasks that are not completed to the next day’s task list.
■ Practice using Worksheet 1: Problem Solving: Selection of Action Plan
for at least one item on the task list.
■ Practice breaking down one large task from the task list into 
smaller steps.
■ Use the organizational systems developed in this program.
■ Gauge your attention span.
■ Use the distractibility delay when working on boring or 
unattractive tasks.



61
OVERVIEW
The main goals of this chapter are for you to learn how to (1) modify your 
environment to reduce distractibility and (2) create reminders for yourself 
to focus on the task at hand.
You will learn how to reduce the number of distractions in your environment and create a situation that is more conducive to concentration. You 
will also learn a strategy that will help you check in with yourself to see if 
you are distracted. This will enable you to refocus your attention on the 
task at hand if you have become distracted.
GOALS
■ To continue to monitor your progress
■ To review your continued use of skills from previous chapters
■ To continue breaking tasks down into steps that match your 
attention span, and using the distractibility delay
■ To learn how to reduce the number of things that are likely to 
distract you in your environment
■ To learn how to check in with yourself to see if you are distracted 
and learn how to refocus on the task at hand when you do become 
distracted
■ To identify exercises for home practice and anticipate difficulties 
using these techniques

CHAPTER 9 Modifying Your Environment

62
Review of Symptom Checklist
As you have been doing each week, complete the ASRS Symptom 
Checklist at the start of your therapy session, and share this information 
with your therapist.
Score: _________________ Date: _________________
Review of Medication Adherence
As you have been doing each week, record your prescribed dosage of medication and indicate the number of doses you missed. List triggers for 
missed doses.
Prescribed doses per week:
Doses missed this week:
Triggers for missed doses:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
Review of Previous Chapters
Each week you should review your progress implementing skills from 
each of the previous chapters. It is important to acknowledge the successes you have achieved and try to resolve any difficulties.
To review, here are the tools for organization and planning:
■ Use of calendar for managing appointments: Discuss any problems 
you are having with using your calendar system.
■ Use of task list system: Review any difficulties you are having with 
using your task list on a daily basis.
■ Use of the “A,” “B,” and “C” priority ratings: Discuss any trouble 
you are having with prioritizing tasks.
■ Use of problem solving (selecting an action plan) and breaking down 
large tasks into small steps: Consider your use of these strategies and 
practice one or both skills using examples from your current task list.

63
Here are the tools for reducing distractibility:
■ Use of the strategy of breaking tasks down into manageable chunks: 
Discuss any problems you are having with breaking down tasks.
■ Use of the distractibility delay: Review any difficulties you are 
having with the distractibility delay technique.
Skill: Controlling Your Work Environment
It is important for individuals with ADHD to work in an environment 
that has few distractions. Even with the distractibility coping skills discussed above, most people are somewhat distractible when they are trying 
to concentrate. Sometimes, distractions interfere to the point where it is 
too difficult to get things done.
At this time, think about the environment in which you try to do work, 
schoolwork, or important household tasks (e.g., pay bills). Ask yourself, 
“What are the things that typically distract me from my work?” Some 
typical distractions include the following:
■ The telephone ringing or a notification popping up on your phone, 
computer, or tablet
■ Surfing the Internet, chatting online, playing online games, using 
social media
■ Replying to emails or texts
■ Noticing other things on the desk or table that need attention
■ Listening to something on the radio
■ Watching something on television
■ Speaking to a friend or relative who is in the room
■ Looking at something going on outside the window
What are the types of things that typically get in the way when you are 
trying to get a project done? For each item that is distracting to you, come 
up with a strategy that reduces your susceptibility to this distraction. For 
example, you can do the following:
■ Silence your phone or put it on vibrate.
■ Close your web browser and/or email.
■ Turn off notifications on your phone, computer, or tablet.
■ Clear off your desk or workspace.

trying to get a project done? For each item that is distracting to you, come 
up with a strategy that reduces your susceptibility to this distraction. For 
example, you can do the following:
■ Silence your phone or put it on vibrate.
■ Close your web browser and/or email.
■ Turn off notifications on your phone, computer, or tablet.
■ Clear off your desk or workspace.

64
■ Turn off the radio and television.
■ Ask others not to disturb you because you are working.
■ Turn your desk away from the window.
Use Worksheet 4: Strategies for Reducing Distractions (in the Appendix) to 
identify and eliminate usual distractions for your work environment.
We recommend finding one place in your home where you can do 
important tasks without distractions. This place should be somewhere 
you are able to keep clear. It could be your desk, it could be a table 
near your desk, or it could be any other “workspace.” Many people 
report that their desk becomes cluttered and is difficult to keep clean. 
Of course, you can use your organizational systems discussed above. 
However, if you think that having a messy desk may not change, the 
idea here is to find another space that you can use that you would keep 
clear, and have this be your workspace. You want to set the stage for 
success—by setting up a work environment that is conducive for you to 
be as productive as possible.
Interestingly, some people with ADHD report that they do not concentrate as well when they are in a totally silent environment. It may be 
helpful for you to try to articulate the circumstances that are the most 
helpful in aiding your ability to concentrate. For example, many clients 
report that they concentrate better when there is a certain type of music 
playing in the background (often classical music or other music that does 
not have lyrics that might be distracting).
Skill: Keeping Track of Important Objects
One hallmark of ADHD is that people with this disorder frequently lose 
important items. This is problematic because it can cause lateness and 
increase feelings of frustration.
At this point, take a moment to think of any difficulties that you experience with keeping track of important objects, such as your keys, wallet, 
or phone. Some of these may be items that you need to take with you 
whenever you leave the house.
The next step is to think of a specific place where you would like to keep 
these items. Some people will place a basket somewhere near the door 
and put the important items in the basket each time that they come in 

65
the door. Other people will have a hanging rack for all keys. You may be 
able to place all of your important items in one place, or you may need to 
come up with several different places.
Having specific places where the important items belong increases the 
likelihood that you will be able to locate the items when you need them. 
You need to work to develop the habit.
The goal is to try to never put down your keys or any of the other 
important items in any location except for its target location!
You can improve the success of this technique by involving other family members in the process. You can tell everyone in the household 
where things belong, and ask them to either put the items away or 
to remind you to do so if they notice that something is out of place. 
(Of course, you have to agree not to get mad at them when they 
remind you!)

You can improve the success of this technique by involving other family members in the process. You can tell everyone in the household 
where things belong, and ask them to either put the items away or 
to remind you to do so if they notice that something is out of place. 
(Of course, you have to agree not to get mad at them when they 
remind you!)
The other important (and many times difficult) task to do is 
this: Whenever you see one of these items out of place, you MUST 
immediately return it to the specified spot.
Skill: Using Reminders
Imagine that you could have someone follow you around and constantly 
remind you about all of the skills that we have discussed. Having this person around would greatly increase your use of the skills. You would never 
forget. These skills require that you actively remember to do them. (With 
practice, though, these skills become habits and eventually you won’t have 
to actively remember to use them.)
For most people, a 24-hour personal assistant is not feasible, so we recommend the use of reminders.
An alarm can be helpful in getting you to check in with yourself on a 
regular basis about whether or not you are on task. You can use an alarm 
clock, or an alarm on your watch, computer, or cellphone.
Set the alarm to go off at regularly scheduled intervals during time periods 
when you are trying to concentrate on a task. We recommend trying to 

66
have the alarm sound each half-hour—especially when you are trying to 
be productive.
When the alarm sounds, ask yourself, “Am I doing what I am supposed 
to be doing or did I get distracted?” If you notice that you have become 
distracted, immediately return to the task at hand.
Potential Pitfalls
It is easy to get frustrated with these strategies if they don’t work right 
away. Remember, you are trying to develop new work habits. It takes lots 
of practice before new habits become second nature. Don’t give up! Even 
if it seems like these skills don’t work at first, keep at them. It will pay off 
in the long run when you are able to be less susceptible to distractions and 
get more accomplished.
Practice
■ Continue to use the calendar every day to record appointments and 
put new tasks on the task list every day.
■ Use and look at the task list and calendar EVERY DAY!
■ Rate each task as an “A,” “B,” or “C” task.
■ Practice doing all of the “A” tasks before the “B” tasks and all of the 
“B” tasks before the “C” tasks.
■ Carry over tasks that are not completed to the next day’s task list.
■ Practice using Worksheet 1: Problem Solving: Selection of Action Plan
for at least one item on the task list.
■ Practice breaking down one large task from the task list into 
smaller steps.
■ Use the organizational systems developed in this program.
■ Use the distractibility delay when working on boring or 
unattractive tasks.
■ Use your skills to reduce distraction in your work environment.
■ Start putting important items in specific places.
■ Use reminders to check in with yourself to see if you have become 
distracted when you are trying to focus on completing a task.

MODULE 3



69
OVERVIEW
By now, you have developed systems for organizing, planning, and problem solving and have been practicing skills for managing distractibility. 
The next section, targeting adaptive thinking, will help you increase 
your awareness of negative thoughts that can cause stress and mood 
problems and that can interfere with the successful completion of tasks.
This method of training yourself to think adaptively has been used in 
similar cognitive-behavioral treatments and has been effective in treating many other psychological disorders, such as depression and anxiety disorders.1
 The major goal of learning to think about tasks and 
situations adaptively is to reduce the times when negative or ineffective 
thoughts or moods interfere with tasks, follow-through, or distress or 
add to distractibility.
Adaptive thinking will enable you to do the following:
■ Increase your awareness of negative, interfering thoughts
■ Develop strategies for keeping your thoughts in check
■ Minimize symptoms
Introducing a Cognitive Model 
of ADHD CHAPTER 10
1
 This method of implementing and teaching cognitive-restructuring skills is based on McDermott (2000), as well as other 
cognitive-behavioral therapy manuals, including Hope and colleagues’ 2000 manual for the treatment of social phobia, 
and the 1996 manual by Otto, Jones, Craske, and Barlow for the treatment of panic disorder in the context of medication 
discontinuation.

70
GOALS
■ To continue to monitor your progress
■ To review your continued use of skills from previous chapters
■ To learn basic principles of the cognitive-behavioral model of mood
■ To become skilled in identifying and labeling unhelpful automatic 
thoughts
■ To identify exercises for home practice and anticipate difficulties 
using these techniques
Review of Symptom Checklist
As you have been doing each week, complete the ASRS Symptom 
Checklist at the start of your therapy session, and share this information 
with your therapist.
Score: _________________ Date: _________________
Review of Medication Adherence
As you have been doing each week, record your prescribed dosage of medication and indicate the number of doses you missed. List triggers for 
missed doses.
Prescribed doses per week:
Doses missed this week:
Triggers for missed doses:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
Review of Previous Chapters
Each week you should review your progress implementing skills from 
each of the previous chapters It is important to acknowledge the successes 
you have achieved and to try to resolve any difficulties.

71
To review, here are the tools for organization and planning:
■ Use of calendar for managing appointments: Discuss any problems 
you are having with using your calendar system.
■ Use of task list system: Review any difficulties you are having with 
using your task list on a daily basis.
■ Use of the “A,” “B,” and “C” priority ratings: Discuss any trouble 
you are having with prioritizing tasks.
■ Use of problem solving (selecting an action plan) and breaking 
down large tasks into small steps: Consider your use of these 
strategies and practice one or both skills using examples from your 
current task list.
Here are the tools for reducing distractibility:
■ Use of the strategy of breaking tasks down into manageable 
chunks: Discuss any problems you are having with breaking

down large tasks into small steps: Consider your use of these 
strategies and practice one or both skills using examples from your 
current task list.
Here are the tools for reducing distractibility:
■ Use of the strategy of breaking tasks down into manageable 
chunks: Discuss any problems you are having with breaking 
down tasks.
■ Use of the distractibility delay: Review any difficulties you are 
having with the distractibility delay technique.
■ Removing distractions from environment
■ Identifying specific places for important items and making sure that 
the items always get put away in these places
■ Use of reminders, “Am I doing what I am supposed to be doing?”
The Cognitive-Behavioral Model
Adaptive thinking is just what it sounds like: It is a way of thinking about 
situations in a manner that is adaptive or effective. Sometimes individuals 
have thoughts that are either inaccurate or unhelpful, and this can cause 
difficulties. By learning adaptive thinking, you can learn to challenge your 
inaccurate or unhelpful thoughts and come up with more effective ways 
of looking at situations. Adaptive thinking is important because of the 
interrelationship between thoughts, feelings, and behaviors (Fig. 10.1).
This model emphasizes the important connection between your 
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in a given situation. The cognitive part 
of cognitive-behavioral therapy involves the manner in which thoughts 
contribute to how people act, and the way that thoughts contribute to 
how people feel.

72
The Cognitive Component of Treatment: Automatic Thinking
Every day, numerous thoughts go through our minds. What is surprising 
is that often we are not particularly aware of these thoughts. However, they 
play an important role in determining how we are feeling in a situation, 
and how we may respond. When we are feeling overwhelmed or stressed 
or are anticipating completing a task, the thoughts that go through our 
minds play a critical role in determining the outcome of our situations.
These thoughts are “automatic”—they happen on their own. For example, think about when you first learned to drive a car. In order to coordinate many tasks at once, you had to be conscious of handling the steering 
wheel, remembering to signal for turns, staying exactly in your lane, 
avoiding other traffic, and trying to park. You were doing many tasks at 
the same time that required your total attention.
Now, think about driving today. You probably know how to drive without actively thinking about what you are doing. You likely don’t even 
remember thinking about all of these steps because they have become 
automatic.
In many situations, like the one we describe above, automatic thoughts 
enable us to complete a task more easily. Unfortunately, in other situations, automatic thoughts interfere with achieving goals. For example, 
imagine you have to do a task you will probably not enjoy, such as preparing your tax return. Imagine the following types of thoughts going 
through your mind:
“I am careless and am going to do this wrong.”
“This is going to take forever.”
Thoughts Feelings
Behaviors
Figure 10.1
The cognitive-behavioral model

imagine you have to do a task you will probably not enjoy, such as preparing your tax return. Imagine the following types of thoughts going 
through your mind:
“I am careless and am going to do this wrong.”
“This is going to take forever.”
Thoughts Feelings
Behaviors
Figure 10.1
The cognitive-behavioral model

73
“If I complete my return, I will realize I owe money.”
“If I owe money, I won’t have enough for rent.”
If these thoughts are going through your head, then you can easily see 
that this task will feel overwhelming and stressful. This will increase the 
chances that you will procrastinate by doing any other possible task.
Relationship of Thoughts to Feelings and Behaviors
The behavioral component here is usually some form of avoidance. 
Negative thoughts about a situation can make you avoid the situation 
because you (1) feel worse and (2) expect the outcome of the situation to 
be negative. Avoidance can lead to more anxiety, restlessness, and perhaps 
irritability or depression—the task doesn’t get done, and then your feel 
even worse about it.
Anxiety and depression may lead to more negative thinking, and around 
and around the cycle goes, making the problem worse and worse. For 
people with ADHD, this cycle worsens other symptoms such as inattention, procrastination, frustration, and depression.
The first step in breaking this cycle is to identify and slow down negative or ineffective automatic thinking. Becoming more aware of situations when this occurs is the first step in learning to think in more 
adaptive ways.
Thinking That Is Too Positive
So far, we have talked about NEGATIVE automatic thoughts. However, 
researchers are now identifying another problematic way of thinking in 
adults with ADHD that involves overly optimistic thinking (Knouse & 
Mitchell, 2015). These authors claim that adults with ADHD often set 
overly optimistic goals and verbalize overly positive thoughts. This pattern can cause difficulties in that individuals feel good in the moment 
(e.g., “I don’t really need to do this today because I have plenty of time to 
do it next weekend”). However, this causes problems when the thinking 
and goal setting are unrealistic and the person ends up failing to meet his 
or her goals. Thus, we will be working to identify both negative and overly 
positive thoughts.

74
Skill: Identifying Negative/Unhelpful Automatic Thoughts
The thought record is a tool that was developed to help you learn how to 
identify, slow down, and restructure negative and/or unhelpful automatic 
thoughts. You can use the thought records provided, or you can write 
down this information in your phone, on your computer, or on your 
tablet. There are several apps and websites that allow you to enter this 
information, if you prefer.
Let’s start with a distressing situation that you experienced in the past 
week. Think about the past week and see if you can identify a time when 
you felt overwhelmed, stressed, sad, or upset.
Learning to completing a thought record is best done with the aid of your 
therapist, and takes a good amount of time to learn how to do (Figs. 10.2 
and 10.3). We recommend practicing it over several sessions.
Column 1 should contain a brief description of the situation. When did it 
take place, where were you, with whom, what was going on, and so on? Ideally, 
the description of the situation would just be a sentence or two at most.

therapist, and takes a good amount of time to learn how to do (Figs. 10.2 
and 10.3). We recommend practicing it over several sessions.
Column 1 should contain a brief description of the situation. When did it 
take place, where were you, with whom, what was going on, and so on? Ideally, 
the description of the situation would just be a sentence or two at most.
Column 2 should contain your thoughts—what was going through your 
mind at the time. What were you saying to yourself about the situation, 
about other people, and about your role in the situation? What were you 
afraid might happen? What is the worst thing that could happen if this 
feared outcome occurred? What does this mean about how the other person feels/thinks about you?
Figure 10.2
Sample completed 3-Column Thought Record

75
When coming up with automatic thoughts, it is important to separate 
thoughts from feelings. Thoughts are what you think of the situation. 
Feelings go in the next column.
Column 3 should be a list of the moods or emotions you experienced. 
You may list several different feelings, and then rate the intensity of each 
feeling on a scale of 0 to 100 (0  =  the least intense, 100  =  the most 
intense). Examples of moods include angry, upset, happy, sad, depressed, 
anxious, and surprised.
Figure 10.3
3-Column Thought Record for you to complete

76
Introduction to Thinking Errors
Now that you see how certain situations can trigger automatic thoughts 
and subsequent negative (or at times positive) feelings, let’s look more 
closely at the nature of these automatic thoughts. In our experience, and 
in the work of other cognitive-behavioral therapists, common types of 
negative automatic thoughts often emerge. Moreover, you can begin to 
see how these types of thoughts may interfere with your ability to complete tasks and also contribute to feeling depressed, anxious, or frustrated.
In Box 10.1 you will find a list of common thinking errors. Review each 
one to make sure you understand them all, and then begin to look for 
patterns and determine which types of error may be especially problematic for you.
Box 10.1 Common Thinking Errors
All-or-nothing thinking: You see things in black and white categories. For example, ALL aspects of a project need to be completed 
immediately, or if your performance falls short of perfect, you see it 
as a total failure.
Overgeneralization: You see a single negative event as a neverending pattern.
Mental Filter: You pick out a single negative detail and dwell on it 
exclusively, overlooking other positive aspects of the situation.
Disqualifying the positive: You reject positive experiences by 
insisting they “don’t count” for some reason or other. In this way, 
you can maintain a negative belief that is contradicted by your everyday experiences.
Jumping to Conclusions: You make a negative interpretation, even 
though there are no definite facts that convincingly support your 
conclusion.
Mind Reading: You arbitrarily conclude that someone is reacting 
negatively to you, and you don’t bother to check this out.
Fortune Telling: You anticipate that things will turn out badly, and 
you feel that your prediction is a predetermined fact.
Magnification/Minimization: You exaggerate the importance of 
things (such as your mistake, or someone else’s achievement), or

negatively to you, and you don’t bother to check this out.
Fortune Telling: You anticipate that things will turn out badly, and 
you feel that your prediction is a predetermined fact.
Magnification/Minimization: You exaggerate the importance of 
things (such as your mistake, or someone else’s achievement), or 

77
Skill: Labeling Thinking Errors
Now that you have learned about common types of thinking errors, let’s 
go back to the thought record you filled out earlier. For each of the automatic thoughts you listed, review the list of thinking errors and see if 
you can identify these common patterns in your thinking. Then, list the 
appropriate thinking error in Column 4.
you inappropriately shrink things until they appear tiny (your own 
desirable qualities or other people’s imperfections).
Catastrophizing: You attribute extreme and horrible consequences 
to the outcomes of events. One mistake at work = being fired from 
your job.
Emotional Reasoning: You assume that your negative emotions 
necessarily reflect the way things really are: “I feel it, so it must 
be true.”
“Should” Statements: You try to motivate yourself with “shoulds” 
and “shouldn’ts,” as if you need to be punished before you could 
be expected to do anything. When directed toward others, you feel 
anger, frustration, and resentment.
Labeling and Mislabeling: This is an extreme form of overgeneralization. Instead of describing an error, you attach a negative label 
to yourself or others.
Personalization: You see negative events as indicative of some negative characteristic of yourself or others, or you take responsibility 
for events that were not your doing.
Maladaptive Thinking: You focus on a thought that may be true, 
but over which you have no control. Excessively thinking about it 
can be self-critical, or can distract you from an important task or 
from attempting new behaviors.
Overly Optimistic Thinking: You think about a situation in an 
overly optimistic way that feels good in the moment but leads 
to procrastination and/or avoidance and is not effective in the 
long-run.
This list is modified from Hope, Heimberg, Juster, and Turk (2000), which was 
in turn based on Persons (1989). Overly optimistic thinking is derived from 
Knouse and Mitchell (2015).

78
Keep in mind that not all negative thoughts represent thinking errors. 
Sometimes it is realistic that a situation produces a negative thought, which 
in turn contributes to a negative feeling. For example, imagine you had been 
studying for an exam for many days and you were driving to school to take 
the exam. Then, suddenly you encountered a traffic jam due to a car accident 
that occurred earlier. Now, if your thought was, “Oh no! I hope I won’t be late! 
I studied so hard for this exam,” and you were feeling anxious and perhaps 
frustrated, that would make sense! The challenge for you would be to problem 
solve—in other words, to try and stay calm, perhaps to call the instructor to 
let her know you are going to be late, and to focus on driving safely.
However, if in addition to those thoughts you also said to yourself, “Bad 
things always happen to me, I can never do anything right. I am going to 
miss the exam and fail the class,” we can imagine that your anxiety and 
despair would intensify, and that you may be more likely to drive dangerously. Furthermore, if you did get to the exam in time, you most likely

However, if in addition to those thoughts you also said to yourself, “Bad 
things always happen to me, I can never do anything right. I am going to 
miss the exam and fail the class,” we can imagine that your anxiety and 
despair would intensify, and that you may be more likely to drive dangerously. Furthermore, if you did get to the exam in time, you most likely 
would not be able to concentrate as well as you did when you were studying. 
Looking closely, you can see that these thoughts, respectively, could be classified as overgeneralization, personalization, and jumping to conclusions. See the 
example in Figure 10.4, and then you can use the blank chart (Fig. 10.5) to 
record your own examples of negative and/or ineffective thoughts.
Figure 10.4
Sample completed 4-Column Thought Record

79
Potential Pitfalls
For some people, writing out negative thoughts makes the thoughts 
“seem more real” or more difficult to cope with. Because of this, they 
are reluctant to use thought records. However, the thought is in your 
mind, interfering, regardless of whether you write it down. Completing 
the thought record will actually help you feel better about the situation, 
despite the initial difficulty of seeing your thought written out on paper 
or electronically.
You may find that it is hard to label your feelings and may think that 
you have to come up with the perfect emotion to describe your feelings. In actuality, this is not true. Use the first word that comes to 
mind, even if it is not perfect. Over time, it will become easier to label 
your feelings.
Time and 
Situation Automatic Thoughts Mood and 
Intensity Thinking Error
Figure 10.5
4-Column Thought Record for you to complete

80
Preliminary Instructions for Adaptive Thinking
The purpose of using thought records is to identify and modify negative, 
automatic thoughts in situations that lead to feeling overwhelmed.
The first step in learning to think in more useful ways is to become more 
aware of these thoughts and their relationship to your feelings. If you are 
anticipating a stressful situation, or a task that is making you feel overwhelmed, write out your thoughts regarding this situation.
If a situation has already passed and you find that you are thinking about 
it negatively or if, in retrospect, you realize that you were having unhelpful thoughts, list your thoughts for this situation.
The first column is a description of the situation.
The second column is for you to list your thoughts during a stressful, 
overwhelming, or uncontrollable situation.
The third column is for you to write down what emotions or feelings you are having when thinking these thoughts (e.g., depressed, sad, 
angry).
The fourth column is for you to see if your thoughts match the list of 
thinking errors. These may include the following:
■ All-or-Nothing Thinking
■ Overgeneralizations
■ Jumping to Conclusions (Fortune Telling/Mind Reading)
■ Magnification/Minimization
■ Emotional Reasoning
■ “Should” Statements
■ Labeling and Mislabeling
■ Personalization
■ Maladaptive Thinking
■ Overly Optimistic Thinking

thinking errors. These may include the following:
■ All-or-Nothing Thinking
■ Overgeneralizations
■ Jumping to Conclusions (Fortune Telling/Mind Reading)
■ Magnification/Minimization
■ Emotional Reasoning
■ “Should” Statements
■ Labeling and Mislabeling
■ Personalization
■ Maladaptive Thinking
■ Overly Optimistic Thinking

81
Practice
In this session, try to anticipate which situations you may want to work 
on in the upcoming week. In addition, be sure to anticipate any problems 
that may get in the way of completing the practice exercises. For example, 
having a busy schedule, going out of town, or being uncertain about how 
to complete an assignment may make it more difficult to practice your 
skills. We have found that if you can anticipate and try to resolve any 
problems in advance, these obstacles can become manageable, and you will 
be more likely to achieve success with the new skills. Remember that you 
do not have to complete these home assignments perfectly! The idea is to 
begin monitoring your thoughts that arise in difficult situations and begin 
practicing identifying the common types of thinking errors.
■ Continue to use the calendar every day to record appointments and 
put new tasks on the task list every day.
■ Use and look at the task list and calendar EVERY DAY!
■ Rate each task as an “A,” “B,” or “C” task.
■ Practice doing all of the “A” tasks before the “B” tasks and all of the 
“B” tasks before the “C” tasks.
■ Carry over tasks that are not completed to the next day’s task list.
■ Practice using Worksheet 1: Problem Solving: Selection of Action Plan
for at least one item on the task list.
■ Practice breaking down one large task from the task list into 
smaller steps.
■ Use the organizational systems developed in this program.
■ Use the distractibility delay when working on boring or 
unattractive tasks.
■ Use your skills to reduce distraction in your work environment.
■ Start putting important items in specific places.
■ Use reminders to check in with yourself to see if you have become 
distracted when you are trying to focus on completing a task.
■ Read the “Preliminary Instructions for Adaptive Thinking” about 
completing a thought record.
■ Complete thought records for at least two situations during 
the week.

82
As you have learned from the previous modules, practicing new skills is 
vital so that you become familiar with them, are able to easily use the tools, 
and begin to see the positive results that can emerge when you consistently 
use these cognitive-behavioral strategies. Recognize that, at first, when you 
are learning a new skill, it may feel awkward, may be confusing, and may 
require effort to implement. That’s okay! The more you practice, the easier 
it will become.

83
OVERVIEW
The primary goal of this chapter is for you to learn how to develop alternative thoughts to replace your negative and/or unhelpful thoughts. You 
will do this by working through a process called cognitive restructuring 
that involves observing your thoughts, labeling them as inaccurate or 
unhelpful, and then coming up with more accurate or helpful thoughts.
GOALS
■ To continue to monitor your progress with the Symptom Checklist
■ To review your continued use of skills from previous chapters
■ To review thought records completed at home
■ To discuss coaching styles and the coaching story
■ To discuss formulation of a rational response

CHAPTER 11 Adaptive Thinking

84
Review of Medication Adherence
As you have been doing each week, record your prescribed dosage of medication and indicate the number of doses you missed. List triggers for 
missed doses.
Prescribed doses per week:
Doses missed this week:
Triggers for missed doses:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
Review of Previous Chapters
Each week you should review your progress implementing skills from 
each of the previous chapters. It is important to acknowledge the successes you have achieved and to try to resolve any difficulties.
Here are the tools for organization and planning:
■ Use of calendar for managing appointments: Discuss any problems 
you are having with using your calendar system.
■ Use of task list system: Review any difficulties you are having with 
using your task list on a daily basis.
■ Use of the “A,” “B,” and “C” priority ratings: Discuss any trouble 
you are having with prioritizing tasks.
■ Use of problem solving (selecting an action plan) and breaking 
down large tasks into small steps: Consider your use of these 
strategies and practice one or both skills using examples from your 
current task list.
Here are the tools for reducing distractibility:
■ Use of the strategy of breaking tasks down into manageable 
chunks: Discuss with your therapist any problems you are having 
with breaking down tasks.
■ Use of the distractibility delay: Review any difficulties you are 
having with the distractibility delay technique.
■ Removing distractions from environment

85
■ Identifying specific places for important items and making sure that 
the items always get put away in these places
■ Use of reminders, “Am I doing what I am supposed to be doing?”
Here are the tools for developing adaptive thinking:
■ Use of thought records to identify and label automatic thoughts
Review the thought records you completed at home. If you were not able 
to complete any thought records, try to identify the obstacles that may 
have interfered, and use the problem-solving skills to determine the best 
way to work on automatic thinking. Did you have difficulty making time 
for home practice? Were the directions confusing? Was it difficult to see 
your thoughts in writing?
If you didn’t do any thought records at home, it may be useful to practice 
doing one together with your therapist before going on.
If you did, then you should review for each situation the automatic 
thoughts and the thinking errors that you identified. Did you see any 
patterns?
Sometimes it can be tricky to sort out thoughts from feelings. Your therapist can help with this, and you can practice asking yourself, “Is this what 
I was thinking or feeling?”
Skill: Formulating a Rational Response
In this session, you will learn strategies to correct thinking errors and 
develop more helpful thoughts. Our goal is to help you transform the 
unhelpful, interfering thoughts into more supportive, helpful coaching 
thoughts. To understand how powerful your thoughts can be, we like to 
tell the coaching story in Box 11.1.
This story is meant to help you recognize negative, unhelpful thoughts as 
they pop up (Coach A thoughts) and to learn to develop more supportive, 
rational thinking (Coach B thoughts).
Let’s go back to one of the thought records you previously completed. 
Review the automatic thoughts and thinking errors that you identified.

This story is meant to help you recognize negative, unhelpful thoughts as 
they pop up (Coach A thoughts) and to learn to develop more supportive, 
rational thinking (Coach B thoughts).
Let’s go back to one of the thought records you previously completed. 
Review the automatic thoughts and thinking errors that you identified. 
If you have not completed a thought record yet, begin one now. The 
next step is to evaluate the helpfulness of each thought. The following 

86
Box 11.1 Coaching Story
This is a story about Little League baseball. I talk about Little League 
baseball because of the amazing parents and coaches involved. And 
by “amazing” I don’t mean good. I mean extreme. You will see how 
it relates to ADHD and how you talk to yourself.
But this story doesn’t start with the coaches or the parents; it starts 
with Johnny, who is a Little League player in the outfield. His job is 
to catch “fly balls” and return them to the infield players. On this particular day of our story, Johnny is in the outfield. And “crack!”—one 
of the players on the other team hits a fly ball. The ball is coming to 
Johnny. Johnny raises his glove. The ball is coming to him, it is coming to him … Johnny jumps up as high as he can, but he is in the 
wrong place at the wrong time doing the wrong strategy, so it goes 
over his head. Johnny misses the ball, and the other team scores a run.
Now there are a number of ways a coach can respond to this situation. Let’s take Coach A first. Coach A is the type of coach who will 
come out on the field and shout, “I can’t believe you missed that ball! 
Anyone could have caught it! My dog could have caught it! You screw 
up like that again and you’ll be sitting on the bench! That was lousy!”
Coach A then storms off the field. At this point, if Johnny is anything like I am, he is standing there, tense, tight, trying not to cry, 
and praying that another ball is not hit to him. If a ball does come 
to him, Johnny will probably miss it. After all, he is tense tight, and 
may see four balls coming to him because of the tears in his eyes. 
Also, if we are Johnny’s parents, we may see more profound changes 
after the game: Johnny, who typically places his baseball glove on the 
mantel, now throws it under his bed. And before the next game, he 
may complain that his stomach hurts, that perhaps he should not go 
to the game. This is the scenario with Coach A.
Now let’s go back to the original event and play it differently. Johnny 
has just missed the fly ball, and now Coach B comes out on the field. 
Coach B says, “Well, you missed that one. Here is what I want you 
to remember: fly balls always look like they are farther away than 
they really are. Also, it is much easier to run forward than to back 
up. Because of this, I want you to prepare for the ball by taking a few 
extra steps backwards. Run forward if you need to, but try to catch it 
at chest level, so you can adjust your hand if you misjudge the ball. 
Let’s see how you do next time.”

they really are. Also, it is much easier to run forward than to back 
up. Because of this, I want you to prepare for the ball by taking a few 
extra steps backwards. Run forward if you need to, but try to catch it 
at chest level, so you can adjust your hand if you misjudge the ball. 
Let’s see how you do next time.”

87
Coach B leaves the field. How does Johnny feel? Well, he is not happy. 
After all, he missed the ball—but there are a number of important 
differences from the way he felt with Coach A. He is not as tense or 
tight, and if a fly ball does come to him, he knows what to do differently to catch it. And because he does not have tears in his eyes, he 
may actually see the ball accurately. He may catch the next one.
So, if we were the type of parent that eventually wants Johnny to 
make the Major League, we would pick Coach B, because he teaches 
Johnny how to be a more effective player. Johnny knows what to do 
differently, may catch more balls, and may excel at the game. But if 
we don’t care whether Johnny makes the Major League—because 
baseball is a game, and one is supposed to be able to enjoy a game—
then we would still pick Coach B. We pick Coach B because we care 
whether Johnny enjoys the game. With Coach B, Johnny knows 
what to do differently; he is not tight, tense, and ready to cry; he 
may catch a few balls; and he may enjoy the game. And he may continue to place his glove on the mantel.
Now, while we may all select Coach B for Johnny, we rarely choose 
the view of Coach B for the way we talk to ourselves. Think about 
your last mistake. Did you say, “I can’t believe I did that! I am so 
stupid! What a jerk!”? These are “Coach A” thoughts and they have 
approximately the same effect on us as they do on Johnny. They 
make us feel tense and tight, and sometimes make us feel like crying. 
And this style of coaching rarely makes us do better in the future. 
Even if you are only concerned about productivity (making the 
Major League) you would still pick Coach B. And if you were concerned with enjoying life, while guiding yourself effectively for both 
joy and productivity, you would still pick Coach B.
Keep in mind that we are not talking about how we coach ourselves 
in a baseball game. We are talking about how we coach ourselves in 
life, and our enjoyment of life. People with excessive distress, and 
many with ADHD, tend to talk to themselves this way.
During the next week, I would like you to listen to see how you are 
coaching yourself. And if you hear Coach A, remember this story 
and see if you can replace Coach A with Coach B.
Reprinted from Otto, M. (2000). Stories and metaphors in cognitive-behavior 
therapy. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 7(2), 166–172. Copyright 2000, with 
permission from Elsevier.

88
questions are suggested prompts to help you objectively evaluate these 
thoughts:
■ What is the evidence that this thought is true?
■ Is there an alternative explanation?
■ What is the worst thing that can happen?
■ Has this situation unreasonably grown in importance?
Figure 11.1
Sample completed 5-Column Thought Record

questions are suggested prompts to help you objectively evaluate these 
thoughts:
■ What is the evidence that this thought is true?
■ Is there an alternative explanation?
■ What is the worst thing that can happen?
■ Has this situation unreasonably grown in importance?
Figure 11.1
Sample completed 5-Column Thought Record

89
■ What would a good coach say about this situation?
■ Have I done what I can to control it?
■ If I were to do anything else, would this help or hinder the situation?
■ Am I worrying excessively about this?
■ What would a good friend say to me about this situation?
■ What would I say to a good friend about this situation if he or she were 
going through it?
■ Why is this statement a thinking error?
We now need to move to the 5-Column Thinking Record, which is the 
final version of the thinking record that we will be using in this program (Figs. 11.1 and 11.2). In the last, and very important, column, you 
formulate a rational response. The rational response is a statement that 
you can say to yourself to try to feel better about the situation. Keep in 
mind that we are not asking you to overlook all negative aspects of your 
thoughts. Rather, the idea is to come up with a more balanced, objective, 
and helpful way of thinking about the situation.
Figure 11.2
5-Column Thought Record

90
Remember that even if thoughts are true (e.g., “I didn’t study as much 
as I would have liked for that test”), it may not be helpful to focus on 
them in a particular situation (e.g., as you are walking into the classroom to take the test in question). In that case, the strategy is not 
necessarily to argue with yourself about whether the thought is true, 
but simply to point out that it is unhelpful to focus on the thought at 
this time.
Potential Pitfalls
We have discussed several different types of thinking errors that can contribute to negative feelings and behaviors. While it is important to be 
familiar with the types of errors you may be making, don’t get stuck trying 
to find the exact type of error that corresponds with your thought. Your 
thought may fit into more than one category, and often these categories 
of thinking errors overlap. Your goal is to recognize that your automatic 
thought might be a thinking error, to understand why this is true, and, 
most importantly, to come up with a rational response.
Identifying a rational response may be tricky at first. Refer to the suggested questions (e.g., What would you say to a friend who said this?). 
Also, keep in mind that your thoughts and feelings about the situation may not completely change immediately after identifying a rational 
response. However, if you repeat the more helpful responses to yourself, they will begin to replace the negative, automatic thoughts you 
initially had.
Instructions for Completing the 5-Column Thought Record 
and Developing a Rational Response
The purpose of adaptive thinking is to promote optimal thinking when 
you are feeling stressed. The steps that are involved can be achieved using 
the rest of the worksheet. Throughout the week when you are feeling 
stressed, sad, or overwhelmed, continue to list your thoughts for each situation. If you are anticipating a stressful situation, or a task that is making 
you feel overwhelmed, write out your thoughts regarding this situation. If 
a situation has already passed, and you find that you are thinking about it

stressed, sad, or overwhelmed, continue to list your thoughts for each situation. If you are anticipating a stressful situation, or a task that is making 
you feel overwhelmed, write out your thoughts regarding this situation. If 
a situation has already passed, and you find that you are thinking about it 
negatively, list your thoughts for this situation.

91
The first column is a description of the situation.
The second column is for you to list your thoughts during a stressful, 
overwhelming, or uncontrollable situation.
The third column is for you to write down what emotions you are having 
and what your mood is like when thinking these thoughts (e.g., depressed, 
sad, angry).
The fourth column is for you to see if your thoughts match the list of 
thinking errors. These may include the following:
■ All-or-Nothing Thinking
■ Overgeneralizations
■ Jumping to Conclusions (Fortune Telling/Mind Reading)
■ Magnification/Minimization
■ Emotional Reasoning
■ “Should” Statements
■ Labeling and Mislabeling
■ Personalization
■ Maladaptive Thinking
■ Overly Optimistic Thinking
In the last column, try to come up with a rational response to each 
thought, or to the most important negative thought. The rational response 
is a statement that you can say to yourself to try to feel better about 
the situation. Questions to help come up with this rational response can 
include the following:
■ What is the evidence that this thought is true?
■ Is there an alternative explanation?
■ What is the worst thing that can happen?
■ Has this situation unreasonably grown in importance?
■ What would a good coach say about this situation?
■ Have I done what I can do to control it?
■ If I were to do anything else, would this help or hinder the situation?
■ Am I worrying excessively about this?
■ What would a good friend say to me about this situation?
■ What would I say to a good friend about this situation if he or she were 
going through it?
■ Why is this statement a cognitive distortion?
■ Is it helpful to focus on this thought at this moment?

92
Practice
Remember, practicing your new skills will make them feel more comfortable and you will begin to notice improvements. First, identify situations 
you will work on at home using the thought record. Also consider any difficulties you may have completing this assignment and try to minimize the 
chance that obstacles will emerge.
■ Continue to use the calendar every day to record appointments and 
put new tasks on the task list every day.
■ Use and look at the task list and calendar EVERY DAY!
■ Rate each task as an “A,” “B,” or “C” task.
■ Practice doing all of the “A” tasks before the “B” tasks and all of the 
“B” tasks before the “C” tasks.
■ Carry over tasks that are not completed to the next day’s task list.
■ Practice using Worksheet 1: Problem Solving: Selection of Action Plan
for at least one item on the task list.
■ Practice breaking down one large task from the task list into 
smaller steps.
■ Use the organizational systems developed in this program.
■ Use the distractibility delay when working on boring or 
unattractive tasks.
■ Use your skills to reduce distraction in your work environment.
■ Start putting important items in specific places.
■ Use reminders to check in with yourself to see if you have become 
distracted when you are trying to focus on completing a task.
■ Read the instructions for completing the 5-Column Thought Record.

■ Use your skills to reduce distraction in your work environment.
■ Start putting important items in specific places.
■ Use reminders to check in with yourself to see if you have become 
distracted when you are trying to focus on completing a task.
■ Read the instructions for completing the 5-Column Thought Record.
■ Complete thought records for at least two situations during 
the week.

93
OVERVIEW
The primary goal of this chapter is for you to continue working on developing your ability to recognize negative and unhelpful thoughts and 
changing to more adaptive ways of thinking about situations. You will 
also begin the process of planning for your use of skills in the future, after 
you have completed this workbook.
GOALS
■ To continue to monitor your progress with the Symptom Checklist
■ To review homework from previous modules
■ To review use of thought records to develop more adaptive thoughts
■ To identify exercises for home practice
Review of Symptom Checklist
As you have been doing each week, complete the ASRS Symptom 
Checklist at the start of your therapy session, and share this information 
with your therapist.
Score: _________________ Date: _________________
Rehearsal and Review of  
Adaptive Thinking Skills CHAPTER 12

94
Review of Medication Adherence
As you have been doing each week, record your prescribed dosage of medication and indicate the number of doses you missed. List triggers for 
missed doses.
Prescribed doses per week:
Doses missed this week:
Triggers for missed doses:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
Review of Previous Chapters
Each week you should review your progress implementing skills from 
each of the previous chapters. It is important to acknowledge the successes you have achieved and try to resolve any difficulties.
Here are the tools for organization and planning:
■ Use of calendar for managing appointments: Discuss any problems 
you are having with using your calendar system.
■ Use of task list system: Review any difficulties you are having with 
using your task list on a daily basis.
■ Use of the “A,” “B,” and “C” priority ratings: Discuss any trouble 
you are having with prioritizing tasks.
■ Use of problem solving (selecting an action plan) and breaking 
down large tasks into small steps: Consider your use of these 
strategies and practice one or both skills using examples from your 
current task list.
Here are the tools for reducing distractibility:
■ Use of the strategy of breaking tasks down into manageable 
chunks: Discuss with your therapist any problems you are having 
with breaking down tasks.
■ Use of the distractibility delay: Review any difficulties you are 
having with the distractibility delay technique.

95
■ Removing distractions from environment
■ Identifying specific places for important items and making sure that 
the items always get put away in these places
■ Use of reminders, “Am I doing what I am supposed to be doing?”
Here are the strategies for developing adaptive thinking:
■ Use of thought records to identify and label automatic thoughts
■ Use of thought records to identify rational responses
At this point, you may want to discuss any new situations that you 
are anticipating may require adaptive thinking. Remember to refer to 
the sections of this workbook on adaptive thinking if you find you are

■ Use of thought records to identify and label automatic thoughts
■ Use of thought records to identify rational responses
At this point, you may want to discuss any new situations that you 
are anticipating may require adaptive thinking. Remember to refer to 
the sections of this workbook on adaptive thinking if you find you are 
getting stuck. Adaptive thinking is a tool that you can easily use on 
your own. Initially, it is helpful to write out the five columns and walk 
yourself through the thought record, but ultimately this process will 
take place in your mind. With practice, you will learn to spot unhelpful automatic thoughts as they emerge, and you will be able to come 
up with a rational response to help you feel better about the situation. 
When necessary, you can always write out the thought record, either on 
paper (see the 5-Column Thought Record in the Appendix) or electronically, and review the materials in this workbook.
We suggest using this session to review an additional situation and complete a thought record in full for it.
Planning for Future Parts of Treatment
Congratulations! You have now completed the core elements of cognitivebehavioral treatment for ADHD. Review the “problem list” you completed at the beginning of your treatment to determine whether to do the 
optional chapter on procrastination or whether to do more review work 
on chapters you have already completed.
We include one optional chapter on procrastination. The skills you have 
already learned can be specifically applied to the area of procrastination. 
It is up to you to figure out if you feel you need the extra work or if it 
makes more sense to review material already covered in this workbook 
so far.

96
Potential Pitfalls
You have done a lot of work to get to this point! You may feel like you 
want to take a break, or that you have done enough and will no longer 
have any difficulties related to ADHD. The most important message to 
remember is that you need to continue to PRACTICE, PRACTICE, 
PRACTICE! This will ensure that your newly learned skills become permanent. Your effort will continue to pay off.
Practice
■ Congratulate yourself for completing the core treatment elements!
■ Continue practicing the skills you have learned in previous sections.
■ Continue to use your cognitive techniques for situations involving 
stress.
■ Remember to consider any anticipated problems completing the 
homework.

Additional Skills

MODULE 4



99
OVERVIEW
This session will be helpful if you have been having significant difficulties with procrastination. For adults with ADHD, procrastination can be 
a result of what we call cognitive avoidance—the deliberate postponing 
of tasks because you can focus more easily when you are closer to the 
deadline. Procrastinating may also result from perfectionism (thinking 
the product needs to be perfect, which is not a realistic goal).
The chapter on procrastination consists of a single session because it uses 
several of the skills you have already learned in previous chapters, including cognitive restructuring of thoughts like, “This paper needs to be perfect or I can’t turn it in,” breaking down tasks into manageable steps, and 
learning to set realistic goals for completing individual steps rather than 
the entire task.
Learning skills for managing procrastination will enable you to do the 
following:
■ Understand the attractive aspects of procrastination
■ Anticipate the negative consequences of procrastination
■ Use techniques for solving problems related to procrastination
■ Use adaptive thinking skills for managing procrastination
Application of Skills to 
Procrastination (optional) CHAPTER 13

100
GOALS
■ To continue to monitor your progress
■ To review home practice of previously learned skills
■ To learn about the attractiveness and the negative consequences of 
procrastination
■ To use a Pros and Cons of Procrastination worksheet to help you 
decide whether to procrastinate or not
■ To adapt problem-solving skills to the issue of procrastination
■ To use adaptive thinking for managing procrastination
■ To identify areas for home practice
Review of Symptom Checklist
As you have been doing each week, complete the ASRS Symptom 
Checklist at the start of your therapy session, and share this information 
with your therapist.
Score: _________________ Date: _________________
Review of Medication Adherence
As you have been doing each week, record your prescribed dosage of medication and indicate the number of doses you missed. List triggers for 
missed doses.
Prescribed doses per week:
Doses missed this week:
Triggers for missed doses:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
Review of Previous Chapters
Each week you should review your progress implementing skills from 
each of the previous chapters. It is important to acknowledge the successes you have achieved and try to resolve any difficulties.

101
Here are the tools for organization and planning:
■ Use of calendar for managing appointments: Discuss any problems 
you are having with using your calendar system.
■ Use of task list system: Review any difficulties you are having with 
using your task list on a daily basis.
■ Use of the “A,” “B,” and “C” priority ratings: Discuss any trouble 
you are having with prioritizing tasks.
■ Use of problem solving (selecting an action plan) and breaking 
down large tasks into small steps: Consider your use of these 
strategies and practice one or both skills using examples from your 
current task list.
Here are the tools for reducing distractibility:
■ Use of the strategy of breaking tasks down into manageable 
chunks: Discuss with your therapist any problems you are having 
with breaking down tasks.
■ Use of the distractibility delay: Review any difficulties you are

strategies and practice one or both skills using examples from your 
current task list.
Here are the tools for reducing distractibility:
■ Use of the strategy of breaking tasks down into manageable 
chunks: Discuss with your therapist any problems you are having 
with breaking down tasks.
■ Use of the distractibility delay: Review any difficulties you are 
having with the distractibility delay technique.
■ Removing distractions from environment
■ Identifying specific places for important items and making sure that 
the items always get put away in these places
■ Use of reminders, “Am I doing what I am supposed to be doing?”
Here are the strategies for developing adaptive thinking:
■ Use of thought records to identify and label automatic thoughts
■ Use of thought records to identify rational responses
Introduction to Procrastination
Many individuals with ADHD have struggled with procrastination for 
quite some time. In this chapter you will review your history with procrastination and try to identify the areas in which it has been most problematic for you. In addition, you will learn to think about the reasons 
behind your procrastination. Once you discover the reasons, you will be 
able to use more effective problem-solving strategies that will decrease the 
interference of procrastination.

102
The Attractiveness of Procrastination
While procrastination can cause anxiety and anguish, there are also reasons why it seems desirable or easier to postpone tasks. Some reasons 
include these:
■ Perfectionism/fear of negative evaluation for a less-than-perfect 
product
■ The idea that it is difficult to get started unless the time pressure 
is there
■ The issue seems overwhelming.
■ You have difficulty finding a starting point.
■ The tasks requiring sustained effort are not attractive.
■ You want to wait for a period when you have enough time (this 
usually never comes).
Do any of these reasons sound familiar to you? Think about the reasons 
that seem to underlie procrastination for you. Are there any other reasons 
that are not listed above?
The Consequences of Procrastination
As discussed above, procrastination can appear to be a good option if 
it helps you avoid a negative feeling or if you think that the time/environment must be just right before you can begin a task. Unfortunately, 
these potential benefits are often outweighed by far more negative consequences, including the following:
■ It is stressful waiting until the last minute to complete a task.
■ The task, which is unattractive in the first place, is even worse when 
it is all-encompassing. (Waiting until the last minute means that you 
will have to sacrifice other activities near the deadline.)
■ There may be times when you miss the deadline and there is a 
penalty (e.g., lower grade on a paper, boss becomes angry at work).
■ You feel worse about yourself later.
■ The final product is not as good as it could have been.
■ Ignoring the problem usually makes it worse and even harder to 
solve later.
Do you recognize any of these consequences? Have you experienced 
them? Think about how procrastination has had negative consequences 
for you. There may be other negative outcomes that are not listed above 
but have been significant for you.

■ Ignoring the problem usually makes it worse and even harder to 
solve later.
Do you recognize any of these consequences? Have you experienced 
them? Think about how procrastination has had negative consequences 
for you. There may be other negative outcomes that are not listed above 
but have been significant for you.

103
Skill: Evaluating the Pros and Cons of Procrastination
Sometimes it can be useful to evaluate the pros and cons of an action 
before making a decision. In this way, deciding to procrastinate on a task 
can be seen as a decision that you might be making. Accordingly, you 
can use a “decisional balance” worksheet to help make a decision about 
what to do.
Remember that sometimes the short-term pros and cons differ from the 
long-term ones, so be sure to evaluate both.
Worksheet 8: Pros and Cons of Procrastination (in the Appendix) will assist 
you in objectively rating the pros and cons of procrastination. Think 
about a situation where you might be tempted to procrastinate. Then fill 
in the boxes on the worksheet, first writing out the short-term pros and 
cons, and then writing out the long-term pros and cons. Often, when 
individuals look at this completed worksheet, they observe that, in the 
short term, the pros may outweigh the cons, but in the long term, there 
are more cons.
Unfortunately, it is sometimes difficult to remember the pros and cons in 
the moment when you are facing an overwhelming task. Taking a time 
out and reviewing the pros and the cons can be useful at these times.
Skill: Adapting Problem Solving to the Issue of Procrastination
In Chapter 6 of this workbook you also learned to use skills for problem solving. When a task feels overwhelming, or you are uncertain about 
where to begin, you are more likely to procrastinate. Breaking the task 
down into manageable steps will help avoid this. Remember that each 
step should feel completely “do-able.” If it doesn’t, break the step down 
further. Alternatively, rather than attempting to work on the whole problem, you may want to target only one or two smaller goals.
Another trap that individuals can fall into is setting unreasonable goals. 
Recall that each step should be realistic. The skills you learned for managing distractibility will also be useful here. If you know that you are generally 
able to work on unpleasant tasks for 15 minutes, then you should try to 
break down each step into goals that can be completed in this timeframe.
Refer back to Worksheet 1: Problem Solving: Selection of Action Plan in 
Chapter 6.

104
Skill: Using Adaptive Thinking to Help with Procrastination
As you have learned, your thoughts can play a powerful role in how you 
feel about a situation, and they can influence your actions in a situation. 
Negative and/or unhelpful automatic thoughts can also greatly contribute 
to procrastination. Using thought records will help you create balanced, 
helpful thoughts that will decrease procrastination.
Remember, there are five steps to completing the thought record. You can 
do this on the form provided (Fig. 13.1) or electronically:
1. List the situation contributing to procrastination.
2. List your automatic thoughts regarding the task or goal.
Figure 13.1
Thought record

helpful thoughts that will decrease procrastination.
Remember, there are five steps to completing the thought record. You can 
do this on the form provided (Fig. 13.1) or electronically:
1. List the situation contributing to procrastination.
2. List your automatic thoughts regarding the task or goal.
Figure 13.1
Thought record

105
3. Identify your feelings connected to the thoughts.
4. Refer to the list of thinking errors to evaluate your thoughts.
5. Formulate rational responses to these thoughts.
As you know, practicing new skills is essential for ultimately being able to 
use them easily in a given situation. Use these steps:
■ Think about a specific task or issue about which you have been 
procrastinating.
■ Specifically use each of the above skills for this task or issue.
■ Use the problem-solving strategy to help break the task into 
manageable steps.
■ Write down the steps on your task list.
■ Next, list the automatic thoughts you are having about getting 
started.
■ Finally, identify the appropriate thinking errors and try to come up 
with helpful, rational responses.
Potential Pitfalls
Although you may have struggled with procrastination for many years, it 
is important to remember that you can use the strategies you have already 
learned to decrease the interference of procrastination. Even if you are 
unsure about whether these strategies will help, do an experiment! For 
one month, commit to using these skills each day, and see how well you 
do. Chances are, you are going to see the results quickly, and it will then 
be easier to practice your newly learned techniques.
Practice
■ Plan a reasonable goal or two to initiate from the list of steps that 
you have outlined on your task list.
■ Determine a way that you can reward yourself upon completion of 
the goals.
■ Review your use of skills from the previous sections of treatment. Be 
sure to note any questions or difficulties you may be having.



107
Thinking About the End of Treatment
Congratulations! You are now at the end of over a dozen chapters’ worth 
of information and skills designed to help you treat the distress and 
impairment of your ADHD. However …
The completion of this workbook and the end of your sessions with 
your therapist do not equal the end of your program of treatment.
The strategies and skills that you learned as part of this program now 
need to be practiced regularly so that they become more automatic. In 
other words, the end of regular sessions of treatment signifies the starting 
point of your own program of treatment, where you work to lock in and 
extend the skills and strategies that you have learned. If you make practice 
of these skills part of your daily or weekly schedule, you will help ensure 
that you continue to maintain or extend the benefits you have achieved.
To begin your transition to this next phase of treatment—where you take 
over the role as the therapist directing your own treatment—it is important for you to recognize the nature of the benefits you have achieved.
Review of Symptom Checklist
As you have been doing each week, complete the ASRS Symptom 
Checklist at the start of your therapy session, and share this information 
with your therapist.

CHAPTER 14 Handling Slips

108
Score: _________________ Date: _________________
Review the symptom scores that you wrote in at the beginning of each 
chapter with your therapist. You may want to re-copy the scores in 
Figure 14.1 so that you can see when and where during the course of 
treatment you made particular gains. Remember, the benefits from any 
particular treatment strategy may not appear until it has been practiced 
for several weeks.
Examining What Was Valuable for You
Also, consider what strategies might have been the most useful for you 
during the program. Worksheet 9: Treatment Strategies and Usefulness (in 
the Appendix) summarizes many of the strategies you have tried.
Rate the usefulness of each strategy to you (0  =  didn’t help at all to 
100 = was extremely important for me). Also, take some time to think 
Figure 14.1
Symptom scores

109
about why each strategy worked or didn’t work. This will help you identify which strategies might be most helpful for you to practice over the 
next month.
Maintaining Your Gains
Successful treatment does not mean that you will not have future difficulties with symptoms. For most conditions, symptoms can wax and wane 
over time.
The key to maintaining treatment gains over the long run is to be 
ready for periods of increased difficulties.
These periods are not signs that the treatment failed you. Instead, they are 
signals that you need to apply the skills that you learned in treatment. To 
help you refresh your skills, study the troubleshooting difficulties chart 
(Table 14.1). The purpose of the chart is to remind you of the importance 
of practicing skills, and to help you think through which strategies might 
be important for you to continue practicing.
The first step in being prepared for this upcoming review is to schedule 
it. If you followed aspects of this program, you now know exactly where 
your core calendar is—it is in the location that you identified (and if it 
isn’t there, this might be a first reminder to work harder to always return 
your important tools to your selected spot). Schedule a review session 
with yourself one month from the current date. Use Worksheet 10: OneMonth Review (in the Appendix) for this self-review.
Troubleshooting Your Difficulties
It may also be helpful to match some of the symptoms you may be experiencing with some of the specific strategies used in treatment. Examine the 
chart in Table 14.1, and see if it helps you identify some of the strategies 
that may be helpful to practice.

110
Finally, you may want to use Worksheet 1: Problem Solving: Selection of 
Action Plan in Chapter 6 to more carefully consider any difficulties with 
symptoms you are currently having. And if these strategies do not help, 
consider getting additional input from family or friends, or schedule a 
booster session with your therapist.
We wish you the best in continuing to use these skills!
Table 14.1 Troubleshooting Difficulties Chart
Symptoms Skills to Consider
Failing to give adequate attention to details/
making careless mistakes in work or other 
activities
Recheck your attention span and your ability to break 
activities into units where you can sustain attention.
Use your cues (alarm) to remind you of core 
responsibilities at hand.
Difficulty sustaining attention in tasks Check your management of your space. Are your 
environments too distracting?
Difficulty organizing tasks in terms of

Recheck your attention span and your ability to break 
activities into units where you can sustain attention.
Use your cues (alarm) to remind you of core 
responsibilities at hand.
Difficulty sustaining attention in tasks Check your management of your space. Are your 
environments too distracting?
Difficulty organizing tasks in terms of 
importance
Use your prioritization system.
Use your triage and organizational systems.
Procrastination Use problem solving and adaptive thinking.
Break down large tasks into smaller steps.
Losing things necessary for tasks or activities Use a single work area.
Use your triage and organizational systems.
Work with another person to reduce clutter.
Easily distracted by things going on in the 
environment
Manage your environment, and use your distractibility 
delay.
Forgetful in daily activities Use your alarm system and your task list along with your 
calendar.

111
Accessing Treatments ThatWork Forms and Worksheets Online
All forms and worksheets from books in the TTW series are made available digitally shortly following print publication. You may download, print, save, and digitally complete them as PDFs. 
To access the forms and worksheets, please visit http://www.oup.com/us/ttw.
Worksheet 1: Problem-Solving: Selection of Action Plan
Worksheet 2: Steps for Sorting Mail
Worksheet 3: Developing an Organizational System
Worksheet 4: Strategies for Reducing Distractions
Worksheet 5: 3-Column Thought Record
Handout A: Preliminary Instructions for Adaptive Thinking
Worksheet 6: 4-Column Thought Record
Handout B: Instructions for Completing a 5-Column Thought Record 
and Developing a Rational Response
Worksheet 7: 5-Column Thought Record
Worksheet 8: Pros and Cons of Procrastination
Worksheet 9: Treatment Strategies and Usefulness
Worksheet 10: One-Month Review
Forms and Worksheets
Appendix 

Worksheet 1 Problem-Solving: Selection of Action Plan
Statement of the Problem: 
Instructions for completing this chart:
1) List all of the possible solutions that you can think of for resolving the problem listed above. 
List solutions even if you think they don’t make sense, or you don’t think you would do them. 
The point is to come up with AS MANY solutions AS POSSIBLE.
2) Make sure that continuing what you are doing now (e.g., avoiding, or doing nothing, if that 
is the case) is one of the possible solutions.
3) List the pros and cons of each solution.
4) After listing the pros and cons of each, give a rating to each solution on a 1–10 scale, with 1 being 
the worst and 10 being the best, based on your assessment of the pros and cons of each solution.
5) Use additional copies of this sheet as needed (even if it’s for the same problem).
Possible Solution Pros of Solution Cons of Solution
Overall 
Rating of 
Solution
(1–10)

Worksheet 2 Steps for Sorting Mail
1. Identify a central location for your triage center: This is where you will open and sort all 
incoming mail, bills, and paperwork. You can use a wicker basket, file tray, drawer, bowl, or 
box for this purpose. The location should be close to your recycling bin and your shredder 
so that you can recycle junk mail immediately and shred items, such as credit card offers, 
that have personal information but do not need to be retained. Your goal is to keep only the 
minimum amount of paper needed. It can be helpful to “unsubscribe” to email lists or opt 
out of mailing lists to reduce the amount of electronic and paper mail that is coming in.

so that you can recycle junk mail immediately and shred items, such as credit card offers, 
that have personal information but do not need to be retained. Your goal is to keep only the 
minimum amount of paper needed. It can be helpful to “unsubscribe” to email lists or opt 
out of mailing lists to reduce the amount of electronic and paper mail that is coming in.
Receptacle you will use for your triage center ____________________________________
Central location for your triage center 
2. Figure out “rules” regarding keeping mail, bills, and paperwork (e.g., I will save copies of all 
bills for six months after they have been paid; I will pay bills right away). If you have a scanner, you may want to scan items and discard the originals to reduce clutter. One item on your 
task list may be to purchase or set up a scanner and test out the process. Alternatively, you 
may take a picture with your phone and transfer the photo to a folder on your computer for 
important documents. Write in your rules below:
3. Gather all necessary items to keep with triage center: Most tasks can be completed on the 
computer, so you should have your computer or tablet nearby when you are triaging. If you 
cannot pay a bill or otherwise respond to an item online, you should keep your checkbook, 
stamps, pens, calculator, address book, and so on nearby so that you don’t need to go searching for these items when you need to pay a bill or respond to a letter.
4. Identify two or three times per week when you will go through the items in the triage center 
and take any action that is required (pay bill, make phone call, respond to letter, and so on). 
Use your calendar and task list to help with planning (e.g., put the task of going through mail 
on your task list).
5. Write your “triage times” in your calendar. Choose times when you will have enough time to 
deal with all of the items; avoid times when you will be too tired or stressed to be effective at 
this task.
6. If you experience negative thoughts and you want to give up, try not to give in to this impulse. 
You will learn how to cope with negative thoughts in the upcoming module on adaptive 
thinking.

Worksheet 3 Developing an Organizational System
Organizational System for: _____________________
1. Decide where you will keep your system. (Don’t spend too much time making this decision.) 
If the system is for paper or objects, this can be an actual location. If it is for computerized 
files, it can be a folder or drive on your computer.
2. Decide on categories. For example, if you are organizing tax information on your computer, 
you may want to set up a folder for each year and then make sub-folders for various deductions. If you are organizing your clothes in your closet, you may decide to put all of your 
shirts together, your pants together, and so on.
3. Buy any materials that you need for your system (file folders for a physical filing system, 
hangers for your closet, baskets or bins if you are organizing smaller items, etc.).
4. Set up your main categories. You can always break down the categories further as you go 
along if needed. Try to keep the system as simple as possible. As the system becomes more 
complicated, the likelihood that you will use it becomes lower.
5. Start sorting your items into categories. It is important to use the OHIO (Only Handle It 
Once) method. This means that when you pick up an item, you decide what to do with it

along if needed. Try to keep the system as simple as possible. As the system becomes more 
complicated, the likelihood that you will use it becomes lower.
5. Start sorting your items into categories. It is important to use the OHIO (Only Handle It 
Once) method. This means that when you pick up an item, you decide what to do with it 
immediately (put it away in final destination—file, closet, or wherever, donate it, shred it, 
recycle it, throw it away, or delete it). You should never have a category called “decide what to 
do with this later.”
6. If it is too overwhelming to deal with everything at once, use the strategy of breaking tasks 
down into smaller chunks described earlier. You can chunk it by setting a time goal (e.g., 
work on the organizational system for 20 minutes), an item goal (e.g., “I will deal with the 
first 20 pieces of paper I touch,” “I will sort through 50 emails”), or a section goal (e.g., “I 
will sort all of my folded sweaters”). Once you complete this “chunk,” you may feel a sense of 
accomplishment and/or you may realize that it is not going to be as time-consuming as you 
imagined to set up your organizational system.
7. Plan specific times each week that you will use the system. Make sure you are not choosing 
unrealistic times.
8. Remember that it is important to practice these skills for long enough that they become a 
habit. Don’t give up too soon! It may have taken a long time for the current disorganized state 
to come into being, so don’t expect yourself to become perfectly organized overnight.
9. Reward yourself for using the system!

115
Worksheet 4
Strategies for Reducing Distractions
Distraction Environmental Reduction Strategy

116
Worksheet 5
3-Column Thought Record
Time and Situation Automatic Thoughts Mood and Intensity

117
Handout A
Preliminary Instructions for Adaptive Thinking
The purpose of using thought records is to identify and modify negative, automatic thoughts in 
situations that lead to feeling overwhelmed.
The first step in learning to think in more useful ways is to become more aware of these thoughts 
and their relationship to your feelings. If you are anticipating a stressful situation, or a task that is 
making you feel overwhelmed, write out your thoughts regarding this situation.
If a situation has already passed and you find that you are thinking about it negatively or if, 
in retrospect, you realize that you were having unhelpful thoughts, list your thoughts for this 
situation.
The first column is a description of the situation.
The second column is for you to list your thoughts during a stressful, overwhelming, or uncontrollable situation.
The third column is for you to write down what emotions or feelings you are having when thinking these thoughts (e.g., depressed, sad, angry).
The fourth column is for you to see if your thoughts match the list of “thinking errors.” These 
may include:
■ All-or-Nothing Thinking
■ Overgeneralizations
■ Jumping to Conclusions (Fortune Telling/Mind Reading)
■ Magnification/Minimization
■ Emotional Reasoning
■ “Should” Statements
■ Labeling and Mislabeling
■ Personalization
■ Maladaptive Thinking
■ Overly Optimistic Thinking

The fourth column is for you to see if your thoughts match the list of “thinking errors.” These 
may include:
■ All-or-Nothing Thinking
■ Overgeneralizations
■ Jumping to Conclusions (Fortune Telling/Mind Reading)
■ Magnification/Minimization
■ Emotional Reasoning
■ “Should” Statements
■ Labeling and Mislabeling
■ Personalization
■ Maladaptive Thinking
■ Overly Optimistic Thinking

118
Worksheet 6
4-Column Thought Record
Time and Situation Automatic Thoughts Mood and Intensity Thinking Errors

119
Handout B
Instructions for Completing the 5-Column thought Record 
and Developing a Rational Response
The purpose of adaptive thinking is to promote optimal thinking when you are feeling stressed. 
The steps that are involved can be achieved using the rest of the worksheet. Throughout the week 
when you are feeling stressed, sad, or overwhelmed, continue to list your thoughts for each situation. If you are anticipating a stressful situation or a task that is making you feel overwhelmed, 
write out your thoughts regarding this situation. If a situation has already passed and you find 
that you are thinking about it negatively, list your thoughts for this situation.
The first column is a description of the situation.
The second column is for you to list your thoughts during a stressful, overwhelming, or uncontrollable situation.
The third column is for you to write down what emotions you are having and what your mood 
is like when thinking these thoughts (e.g., depressed, sad, angry).
The fourth column is for you to see if your thoughts match the list of “thinking errors” These 
may include:
■ All-or-Nothing thinking
■ Overgeneralizations
■ Jumping to Conclusions (Fortune Telling/Mind Reading)
■ Magnification/Minimization
■ Emotional Reasoning
■ “Should” Statements
■ Labeling and Mislabeling
■ Personalization
■ Maladaptive Thinking
■ Overly Optimistic Thinking
In the last column, try to come up with a rational response to each thought, or to the most 
important negative thought. The rational response is a statement that you can say to yourself to 
try to feel better about the situation. Questions to help come up with this rational response can 
include the following:

120
■ What is the evidence that this thought is true?
■ Is there an alternative explanation?
■ What is the worst thing that can happen?
■ Has this situation unreasonably grown in importance?
■ What would a good coach say about this situation?
■ Have I done what I can do to control it?
■ If I were to do anything else, would this help or hinder the situation?
■ Am I worrying excessively about this?
■ What would a good friend say to me about this situation?
■ What would I say to a good friend about this situation if he or she were going through it?
■ Why is this statement a cognitive distortion?
■ Is it helpful to focus on this thought at this moment?

■ If I were to do anything else, would this help or hinder the situation?
■ Am I worrying excessively about this?
■ What would a good friend say to me about this situation?
■ What would I say to a good friend about this situation if he or she were going through it?
■ Why is this statement a cognitive distortion?
■ Is it helpful to focus on this thought at this moment?

Worksheet 7 5-Column Thought Record
Time and 
Situation
Automatic Thoughts Mood and 
Intensity
Thinking 
Errors
Rational Response
What is the evidence for the thought? Against the thought? Why is it the particular cognitive distortion? Is there an alternate explanation? What is the worst thing that could happen? What would a good friend or good coach say? What would you say to a friend in a similar situation?

122
Worksheet 8
Pros and Cons of Procrastination
Pros Cons
Short-term
Long-term

Worksheet 9 Treatment Strategies and Usefulness
Please rate the usefulness of each strategy to you (“0” = Didn’t help at all to “100” = Was extremely 
important for me). Also, take some time to provide notes to yourself about why you think each strategy 
worked or didn’t work to help you, and formulate a plan regarding which strategies might be most 
helpful for you to practice over the next month.
Treatment Strategies Usefulness 
Ratings
Notes About Your 
Application/ Usefulness 
of the Strategy
Tools for Organization and Planning
■ Use of calendar for managing 
appointments
■ Use of task list
■ Use of strategy for breaking down tasks into 
subtasks
■ Use of A-B-C ratings for prioritizing 
multiple tasks
■ Use of problem-solving and developing an 
action plan
■ Use of triage and organizational systems
Strategies for Managing Distractibility
■ Use of strategy for breaking down tasks 
into duration of attention span and use of 
breaks in between tasks
■ Using distractibility delay
■ Removing distractions from environment
■ Identifying specific places for important 
objects
■ Use of reminders: alarm, “Am I doing what 
I am supposed to be doing?”
Adaptive Thinking
■ Use of thought records to identify negative 
thoughts
■ Reviewing list of thinking errors
■ Use of thought records to create balanced, 
helpful thoughts

124
Worksheet 10
One-Month Review
Date of review: ________________
1. What skills have you been practicing well?
2. Where do you still have troubles?
3. Can you place the troubles in one of the specific domains used in this treatment?
4. Have you reviewed the chapters most relevant to your difficulties? (Which chapters are 
these?)
5. Have you reviewed Worksheet 9: Treatment Strategies and Usefulness, where you wrote 
those skills that were most helpful to you in the first phase of this treatment? Do you 
need to reapply these skills or strategies?

125
References
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th 
ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Barkley, R. A. (1998). Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: A handbook for diagnosis and treatment
(2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Craske, M. H., & Barlow, D. H. (2006). Mastery of your anxiety and worry: Client workbook (2nd 
ed.). New York: Oxford.
D’Zurilla, T. J. (1986). Problem-solving therapy: A social competence approach to clinical interventions. 
New York: Springer.
Hallowell, E. M. (1995). Psychotherapy of adult attention deficit disorder. In K. G. Nadeau (Ed.),

Craske, M. H., & Barlow, D. H. (2006). Mastery of your anxiety and worry: Client workbook (2nd 
ed.). New York: Oxford.
D’Zurilla, T. J. (1986). Problem-solving therapy: A social competence approach to clinical interventions. 
New York: Springer.
Hallowell, E. M. (1995). Psychotherapy of adult attention deficit disorder. In K. G. Nadeau (Ed.), 
A comprehensive guide to attention deficit disorder in adults: Research, diagnosis, and treatment (pp. 
146–167). New York: Brunner/Mazel.
Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. H., Juster, H. R., & Turk, C. L. (2000). Managing social anxiety: A cognitive behavioral therapy approach. Boulder, CO: Graywind Publications.
Kelly, K., & Ramundo, P. (1993). You mean I’m not lazy, stupid, or crazy? A self-help book for adults 
with attention deficit disorder. New York: Fireside.
Mayes, V. (1998). A clinician’s handbook for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in adults. 
Unpublished dissertation, Colorado State University.
McDermott, S. P. (2000). Cognitive therapy of adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. 
In T. Brown (Ed.), Attention deficit disorders and comorbidity in children, adolescents, and adults. 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Nadeau, K. G. (1995). Life management skills for the adult with ADD. In K. G. Nadeau (Ed.), A 
comprehensive guide to attention deficit disorder in adults: Research, diagnosis, and treatment (pp. 
191–217). New York: Brunner/Mazel.
Nezu, A. M., Nezu, C. M., Friedman, S. H., Faddis, S., & Houts, P. S. (1998). Helping cancer 
patients cope: A problem-solving approach. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Otto, M. W., Jones, J. C., Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1996). Stopping anxiety medication:  Panic control therapy for benzodiazepine discontinuation (therapist guide). San Antonio, 
TX: Psychological Corporation.
Safren, S. A., Sprich, S., Chulvick, S., & Otto, M. W. (2004). Psychosocial treatments for adults 
with ADHD. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 27(2), 349–360.
Safren, S. A., Otto, M. W., Sprich, S. E., Winett, C. L., Wilens, T. E., & Biederman, J. (2005). 
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for ADHD in medication-treated adults with continued symptoms. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43(7), 831–842.
Safren, S. A., Sprich, S., Mimiaga, M. J., Surman, C., Knouse, L., Groves, M., & Otto, M. W. 
(2010). Cognitive behavioral therapy vs. relaxation with educational support for medicationtreated adults with ADHD and persistent symptoms: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA, 
304(8), 875–880.



127
About the Authors
Steven A.  Safren, PhD, is currently a Professor of Psychology at the 
University of Miami. His grant-funded work related to ADHD includes 
being the principal investigator (PI) of a five-year NIMH R01 to study 
the efficacy of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for ADHD in adults, 
and the lead author of the outcome of that trial published in JAMA—the 
Journal of the American Medical Association. He was also the PI of a twoyear NIMH R03 that studied the initial efficacy of CBT for ADHD in 
adults, and multiple PI (with Dr. Sprich) of a three-year R34 to examine the efficacy of this approach with adolescents. Before working at the 
University of Miami, Dr.  Safren was, for 18  years, at the Department 
of Psychiatry at Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH)/Harvard 
Medical School, where he was a Professor of Psychology and Director

adults, and multiple PI (with Dr. Sprich) of a three-year R34 to examine the efficacy of this approach with adolescents. Before working at the 
University of Miami, Dr.  Safren was, for 18  years, at the Department 
of Psychiatry at Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH)/Harvard 
Medical School, where he was a Professor of Psychology and Director 
of Behavioral Medicine. There he served in a variety of other roles, such 
as the Director for the Cognitive Behavioral Therapy and Behavioral 
Medicine Clinical Psychology Internship tracks, and as the Associate 
Director of the Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Program. Additionally, he 
maintained a clinical practice treating clients with CBT at MGH. At the 
time of writing, Dr. Safren has over 250 publications in the areas of CBT, 
psychopathology, and their application to a variety of clinical problems in 
adults. In addition to his focus on adult ADHD, Dr. Safren has a major 
focus working on the development and testing of interventions related to 
medical problems such as HIV. This work is also funded by the National 
Institutes of Health.
Susan E.  Sprich, PhD, is the Director of the Cognitive Behavioral 
Therapy Program at MGH and an Assistant Professor in Psychology at 
Harvard Medical School. She also serves as the Director of Postgraduate 
Psychology Education at the Psychiatry Academy at MGH. She was the 
Project Director of a five-year study of CBT for adult ADHD and the 
co-PI of a three-year study of CBT for adolescent ADHD, both funded 
by NIMH. She is also involved in clinical research in the treatment of 
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, Autism Spectrum Disorders, trichotillomania, and other anxiety and mood disorders. She has authored over 
20 publications in the areas of ADHD and anxiety disorders in children 

128
and adults. Dr. Sprich conducts CBT with clients with mood disorders, 
anxiety disorders, and ADHD through the Cognitive Behavioral Therapy 
Program at MGH and in private practice. Dr. Sprich received her doctorate in clinical psychology from the State University of New York at 
Albany, and did her predoctoral and postdoctoral fellowships in CBT at 
MGH/Harvard Medical School.
Carol A. Perlman, PhD, is a Cognitive Behavioral Therapist who specializes in the treatment of mood disorders, anxiety disorders, and adult 
ADHD. Dr.  Perlman was formerly a Clinical Assistant in Psychology 
at MGH, Instructor in Psychology at Harvard Medical School, and 
Project Director at the Harvard University Department of Psychology. 
She received her doctorate in clinical psychology from the University of 
Miami in Coral Gables, Florida, and her postdoctoral training at MGH/
Harvard Medical School. She served as a therapist for the initial study 
of CBT for adult ADHD and a Co-Investigator and therapist for the 
efficacy study. Dr. Perlman has published over 20 articles in the area of 
mood disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder, and adult ADHD. She 
is a national workshop presenter on CBT. Dr. Perlman is the owner of 
Perlman Psychology Associates, LLC and maintains a private practice in 
Medway, Massachusetts.
Michael W. Otto, PhD, is Professor of Psychological and Brain Sciences 
at Boston University. He specializes in CBT of anxiety, mood, and substance use disorders. He has had a major career focus on developing and 
validating new psychosocial treatments, including treatments for ADHD.

Medway, Massachusetts.
Michael W. Otto, PhD, is Professor of Psychological and Brain Sciences 
at Boston University. He specializes in CBT of anxiety, mood, and substance use disorders. He has had a major career focus on developing and 
validating new psychosocial treatments, including treatments for ADHD. 
His research includes a translational research agenda investigating brain–
behavior relationships in therapeutic learning, including the use of novel 
medications (e.g., d-cycloserine, yohimbine) and novel behavioral strategies to improve therapeutic learning/outcome. His focus on hard-to-treat 
conditions and principles underlying behavior-change failures led him 
to an additional focus on health behavior promotion, including investigations of addictive behaviors, medication adherence, sleep, smoking, 
and exercise. Across these health behaviors, he has been concerned with 
cognitive, attention, and affective factors that derail adaptive behaviors, 
and the factors that can rescue these processes. Dr. Otto has over 370 
publications spanning his research interests and was identified as a “top 
producer” in the clinical empirical literature. Dr. Otto is a past President 
of the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies, a member of 
the Scientific Advisory Board for the Anxiety and Depression Association 
of America, and President Elect of the Society for Clinical Psychology.
