Praise for Taking Charge of Adult ADHD
“Powerful and essential! Your health, happiness, and future have long been a para-
mount concern to Dr. Barkley. Here he shares step-by-step guidance to get you
where you want to be. Dr. Barkley’s clear, compassionate voice makes you feel
like you’re in a private conversation with him. This updated second edition is
worth its weight in gold.”
—Gina Pera, author of Is It You, Me, or Adult A.D.D.?
“This is a comprehensive and scientifically based yet comprehensible manual for
understanding and managing adult ADHD. With this information, adults with
ADHD or those close to them can be informed consumers of available treatment
options, behavioral strategies, and supplemental support resources.”
—Library Journal
“Barkley knows what works.”
—ADDitude
“The first edition of this book was excellent; the second edition is even better!
Dr. Barkley is a foremost researcher who helps you understand and cope with
impairments while also developing your strengths. He provides not only practi-
cal guidance about treatment, but also strategies to avoid difficulties in educa-
tion, work, relationships, money management, and health. Dr. Barkley shares his
genuine empathy and personal insights into the challenges ADHD poses. This
book is a valuable resource for adults with ADHD and all those who love and
care for them.”
—Thomas E. Brown, PhD, author of Smart but Stuck:
Emotions in Teens and Adults with ADHD
“The second edition of this wonderful book offers an insightful, fact-based descrip-
tion of how to obtain an accurate diagnosis and find appropriate help. Informa-
tion is presented in a clear manner that will be helpful in guiding you through
treatment. This book has earned its place as a mainstay reference.”
—Lenard A. Adler, MD, author of Scattered Minds



Taking Charge of Adult ADHD

Also from Russell A. Barkley
For more information, visit the author’s website: www.russellbarkley.org
FOR GENERAL READERS
12 Principles for Raising a Child with ADHD
Russell A. Barkley
Taking Charge of ADHD:
The Complete, Authoritative Guide for Parents, Fourth Edition
Russell A. Barkley
Your Defiant Child: Eight Steps to Better Behavior, Second Edition
Russell A. Barkley and Christine M. Benton
Your Defiant Teen: 10 Steps to Resolve Conflict
and Rebuild Your Relationship, Second Edition
Russell A. Barkley and Arthur L. Robin with Christine M. Benton
FOR PROFESSIONALS
ADHD and the Nature of Self-Control
Russell A. Barkley
ADHD in Adults: What the Science Says
Russell A. Barkley, Kevin R. Murphy, and Mariellen Fischer
Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder:
A Handbook for Diagnosis and Treatment, Fourth Edition
Edited by Russell A. Barkley
Barkley Adult ADHD Rating Scale–IV (BAARS-IV)
Russell A. Barkley
Barkley Deficits in Executive Functioning Scale (BDEFS)
Russell A. Barkley
Barkley Deficits in Executive Functioning Scale—
Children and Adolescents (BDEFS-CA)
Russell A. Barkley
Barkley Functional Impairment Scale (BFIS)
Russell A. Barkley
Barkley Functional Impairment Scale—Children and Adolescents (BFIS-CA)
Russell A. Barkley
Barkley Sluggish Cognitive Tempo Scale—
Children and Adolescents (BSCTS-CA)
Russell A. Barkley
Defiant Children: A Clinician’s Manual
for Assessment and Parent Training, Third Edition
Russell A. Barkley
Defiant Teens: A Clinician’s Manual
for Assessment and Family Intervention, Second Edition
Russell A. Barkley and Arthur L. Robin

Barkley Sluggish Cognitive Tempo Scale—
Children and Adolescents (BSCTS-CA)
Russell A. Barkley
Defiant Children: A Clinician’s Manual
for Assessment and Parent Training, Third Edition
Russell A. Barkley
Defiant Teens: A Clinician’s Manual
for Assessment and Family Intervention, Second Edition
Russell A. Barkley and Arthur L. Robin
Executive Functions: What They Are, How They Work, and Why They Evolved
Russell A. Barkley

Taking Charge
of Adult ADHD
Proven Strategies to Succeed
at Work, at Home,
and in Relationships
SECOND EDITION
Russell A. Barkley, PhD
with Christine M. Benton
THE GUILFORD PRESS
New York London

To my grandchildren, Will, Claire, Craig,
and Liam, the lights and loves of my life
—R. A. B.
Copyright © 2022 The Guilford Press
A Division of Guilford Publications, Inc.
370 Seventh Avenue, Suite 1200, New York, NY 10001
www.guilford.com
All rights reserved
The information in this volume is not intended as a substitute for consultation with
healthcare professionals. Each individual’s health concerns should be evaluated by a
qualified professional.
Purchasers of this book have permission to copy the ADHD Symptom Tracking Scale for
personal use or use with clients. This scale may be copied from the book or accessed directly
from the publisher’s website, but may not be stored on or distributed from intranet sites,
Internet sites, or file-sharing sites, or made available for resale. No other part of this book
may be reproduced, translated, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording, or otherwise,
without written permission from the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Last digit is print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available from the publisher.
ISBN 978-1-4625-4685-5 (paperback) — ISBN 978-1-4625-4752-4 (hardcover)
The figure on page 57 is from 12 Principles for Raising a Child with ADHD by Russell A.
Barkley. Copyright © 2021 The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission.
The figure on page 198 is from ADHD in Adults: What the Science Says by Russell A. Barkley,
Kevin R. Murphy, and Mariellen Fischer. Copyright © 2008 The Guilford Press. Reprinted
by permission.

v
Contents
Acknowledgments vii
Author’s Note viii
Introduction 1
Step One
To Get Started, Get Evaluated
1 Is It Possible That You Have ADHD? 5
2 Can You Handle the Problem on Your Own? 14
3 Where Can You Go to Get Help? 19
4 What Do You Need for the Evaluation? 22
5 What Will the Evaluation Tell You? 26
Step Two
Change Your Mindset: Know and Own Your ADHD
6 Know Your ADHD 45
7 Resisting Impulses: The First Step in Self- Control 58
8 Self- Control: How to Get What You Want 64
9 Executive Functions: The Seven Abilities That Make Up 69
Self- Control . . . and More
10 The Nature of ADHD and How You Can Master It 
96
11 Own Your ADHD 101
Step Three
Change Your Brain:
Medications for Mastering ADHD
12 Why It Makes Sense to Try Medication 115
13 The Stimulants 123

8 Self- Control: How to Get What You Want 64
9 Executive Functions: The Seven Abilities That Make Up 69
Self- Control . . . and More
10 The Nature of ADHD and How You Can Master It 
96
11 Own Your ADHD 101
Step Three
Change Your Brain:
Medications for Mastering ADHD
12 Why It Makes Sense to Try Medication 115
13 The Stimulants 123

vi Contents
14 The Nonstimulants 137
15 What to Expect from Treatment 145
Step Four
Change Your Life: Everyday Rules for Success
16 Rule 1: Stop the Action! 159
17 Rule 2: See the Past . . . and Then the Future 163
18 Rule 3: Say the Past . . . and Then the Future 166
19 Rule 4: Externalize Key Information 171
20 Rule 5: Feel the Future 178
21 Rule 6: Break It Down . . . and Make It Matter 183
22 Rule 7: Make Problems External, Physical, and Manual 189
23 Rule 8: Have a Sense of Humor! 194
Step Five
Change Your Situation:
Mastering ADHD in Specific Areas of Your Life
24 Education 199
25 Work 210
26 Money 224
27 Relationships 232
28 Driving, Health, and Lifestyle Risks 242
29 Other Mental and Emotional Problems 255
30 Drugs and Crime 262
Appendix: A Closer Look at ADHD Symptoms 269
Resources 277
Index 285
About the Authors 294
Purchasers of this book can download and print enlarged
versions of the ADHD Symptom Tracking Scale
at
www.guilford.com/barkley18-forms for personal use
or use with clients (see copyright page for details).

vii
Acknowledgments
A number of people who assisted with the research studies that produced some
of the findings in this book deserve my gratitude. First and foremost, I wish to
thank Mariellen Fischer, PhD, and Kevin Murphy, PhD, for their collaboration as
full partners in numerous research studies, including those made possible by three
federally supported grants from the National Institute of Mental Health and the
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development while I was at the
University of Massachusetts Medical School. I also wish to thank Tracie Bush,
Laura Montville, Lorri Bauer, Keith Douville, Cherie Horan, Hope Schrader, Kent
Shiffert, and Peter Leo for their assistance in completing those sizable research
studies. Furthermore, I am grateful beyond measure to the hundreds of adults
with ADHD who took part in these studies and those who served in our control
groups for their willingness to open their lives to us so that we could all learn more
about the nature, life course, impairments, and management of ADHD in adults.
Once more, I wish to extend my sincere appreciation to Kitty Moore and Seymour
Weingarten at The Guilford Press for their encouragement of and assistance with
this book, to Christine Benton for her insightful and constructive feedback on
and sage editing of this book, and for a supportive publishing relationship with
them all that has spanned more than 40 years.

Once more, I wish to extend my sincere appreciation to Kitty Moore and Seymour
Weingarten at The Guilford Press for their encouragement of and assistance with
this book, to Christine Benton for her insightful and constructive feedback on
and sage editing of this book, and for a supportive publishing relationship with
them all that has spanned more than 40 years.

viii
Author’s Note
In this book, I alternate between masculine and feminine pronouns when refer-
ring to a single individual. I have made this choice to promote ease of reading as
our language continues to evolve and not out of disrespect toward readers who
identify with other personal pronouns. I sincerely hope that all will feel included.
All illustrations are composites of real individuals or thoroughly disguised to
protect privacy.

1
Introduction
This book is for you if:
✓ You were diagnosed with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
as an adult.
or
✓ You were diagnosed as a child and still have symptoms.
or
✓ You think you might have ADHD because you have trouble . . .
• 
Concentrating
• 
Paying attention
• 
Getting organized
• 
Managing time
• 
Planning and problem solving
• 
Controlling your emotions
This book can help you if:
✓ You want the scientific facts about what’s wrong.
✓ You want to find the best treatment.
✓ You want to learn strategies and skills to overcome your symptoms.
✓ You want to know how to play up your strengths.

2 Introduction
ADHD is real. And it’s not a condition that affects only kids. I’ve spent
more than 40 years treating, researching, and teaching others about ADHD. For
most of those years, few people believed adults could have ADHD. Now we know
from closer study that as many as two-thirds of the children who have ADHD
will still have it when they grow up. This means 4–5% of all adults have ADHD.
That’s more than 13 million adults in the United States alone (as of 2020).
If you’re among them—or you think you might be—this book is for you. I
wrote it because I think you should reap the benefits of everything we’ve learned
from decades of research. Childhood ADHD is probably among the most exten-
sively studied of all mental or emotional disorders. In fact, the information and
advice in this book are based on more than 400,000 research articles and books on
this disorder that have been published over the last century, more than 200,000
of which were published since the last edition of this book.
We’ve arrived at a very good understanding of what ADHD is. We know a lot
about how it affects the brain. We have a clearer view than ever of how and why
the symptoms make your daily life seem like one long uphill climb.
Best of all, we have treatments that are so effective that many adults end up
feeling as if the playing field has been leveled for them for the first time ever. You’ll
learn about them in the following pages. And based on a theory I’ve developed
about the nature of ADHD, this book also offers you a collection of strategies that
can turn your life around at work, at home, in college, and with your family and
friends. These strategies are based on a scientific understanding of what’s behind
your symptoms, and they can help you be successful everywhere it’s important to
you. It’s only what you deserve.

about the nature of ADHD, this book also offers you a collection of strategies that
can turn your life around at work, at home, in college, and with your family and
friends. These strategies are based on a scientific understanding of what’s behind
your symptoms, and they can help you be successful everywhere it’s important to
you. It’s only what you deserve.

3
Step One
To Get Started,
Get Evaluated
“Time escapes me, and I can’t deal with it effectively like other adults.”
“My mind and my life are a jumbled mess. I often can’t seem to organize my work or
other activities anywhere near as well as the other adults I know.”
“I know that I flit from one thing to another and one project to another, and it drives
the people I have to work with crazy. But I have to do things as soon as I think of them,
because if I don’t, I’ll forget about them, and then they never get done.”
“As a kid, I was always the one who had a hard time sitting still and had all of this
energy and no clue what to do with it. I always felt like an outcast, and I hated it. I
remember having to go to the nurse’s office every day to take my meds—it was the
worst feeling! No one wanted to be friends with me because I did not fit in with the
group. I will never be the quiet, calm, reserved girl in the crowd. I am that outgoing,
sometimes loud (OK, more often than I would like to admit), intense, somewhat nerdy,
sarcastic, funny girl that suddenly everyone likes to be around.”
“So here is what happened last weekend that my wife is so upset about. I get out the
lawn mower Saturday morning to cut the grass. But the gas can is empty. So I throw
it in my Ford Explorer and drive down to the Quickie Mart for gas, and while I am
filling up the can, a best friend pulls in to fill up. He’s as much an addict about trout
fishing as I am. And he says he has an extra pole and waders, so why don’t we hit the
stream for a little fishing. So I say ‘yeah’ and get into his car and leave mine at the gas
station. We fish for an hour or so, and then we’re thirsty and hit this great little bar that
guys love to hang out at and have a beer. It’s now three in the afternoon, and I finally

4 To GeT STARTed, GeT evALuATed
get back to the gas station for my car, and the state police are there. You see, my wife
called them when I didn’t return home after several hours from getting the gas for the
mower, thinking something bad had happened to me. She was so furious with me when
she found out what I had done that she wouldn’t talk to me for days! But that’s how I
am—I just go with the flow of what’s happening around me and can’t remember what
it was I was supposed to get done, or I just blow it off as less interesting than what I
might have a chance to do.”

5
1
Is It Possible That You
Have ADHD?
Do the experiences you just read about sound familiar? These are the voices of
adults with ADHD. The first comment strikes at the very heart of what ADHD is.
It’s a succinct description of the serious time management problems that ADHD
creates for adults in their daily lives. That’s because adults with ADHD seem blind
to time, or nearsighted toward the future. They live in the “now” and struggle to
deal with all those “nexts” in life.
Do you feel like you’re often out of sync with the clock, with schedules and
agendas? Always late or scattered or unsure what to do with the limited hours in
your day? If so, you know it’s no fun feeling like you’re constantly letting yourself

to time, or nearsighted toward the future. They live in the “now” and struggle to
deal with all those “nexts” in life.
Do you feel like you’re often out of sync with the clock, with schedules and
agendas? Always late or scattered or unsure what to do with the limited hours in
your day? If so, you know it’s no fun feeling like you’re constantly letting yourself
and others down by missing deadlines and appearing to stand people up for dates
and appointments. You know it’s hard to maintain a sense of adult accomplish-
ment and competence when those around you think they can’t count on you to
get things done or even show up. Maybe it’s time to change all that.
How Would You Describe Your Problems?
Of course, time management troubles aren’t caused only by ADHD. But if you
share some of the other problems described by the people above, ADHD might be
the culprit. And if it is, there’s a lot you can do to change your life for the better.
Quickly run through this list and check off each question you’d answer with
a “yes.”
☐ Do you have trouble concentrating?
☐ Are you easily distracted?
☐ Do you consider yourself highly impulsive?

6 To GeT STARTed, GeT evALuATed
☐ Do you have trouble getting or staying organized? Do you find yourself
unable to think clearly?
☐ Do you feel like you always have to be busy doing lots of things—but then
you don’t finish most of them?
☐ Do people say you talk too much?
☐ Is it hard for you to listen closely to others?
☐ Do you jump in and interrupt others when they’re
talking or doing something—and then wish you
had thought first?
☐ Does your voice seem to carry over everyone else’s?
☐ Do you struggle to get to the point of what you’re
trying to say?
☐ Do you often feel restless inside?
☐ Do you find yourself forgetting things that need to get done but are not
urgent?
☐ Do you find that your emotions are easily aroused and expressed, espe-
cially feeling impatient, easily frustrated, upset, or angry?
Only a professional evaluation can tell you for sure whether you have ADHD.
But the more questions you answered “yes,” the more likely it is that you have this
disorder. What I can tell you right now is that reams of scientific data show an
association between complaints like these—and hundreds of similar ones—and
ADHD in adults.
The data also tell us how severe the fallout can be. ADHD can make people
spend their paycheck on something fun right now—and never save enough money
for their monthly or annual bill payments or for that vacation or car or house
they’ll want even more tomorrow than the purchase that seemed irresistible today.
It can make them bet it all on an investment that a little patience and research
would have revealed as a bad risk. It can make you say and do all kinds of things
you later regret. And it can lead to making lots of unhealthy choices
each day of your life involving impulsive eating and poor nutrition,
using alcohol and tobacco, having poor sleep habits, engaging in
risky sex, poor driving, and getting inadequate exercise. Sound
familiar?
But you might be thinking, I can’t possibly have ADHD. I’m
not hyperactive! My brother (or sister, nephew, childhood pal,
You don’t have to
be hyperactive to
have adult ADHD.
You’ll find a list of
91 additional symptoms
associated with ADHD,
gathered from a study
we did over 7 years,
in the Appendix
(pp. 271–276).


But you might be thinking, I can’t possibly have ADHD. I’m
not hyperactive! My brother (or sister, nephew, childhood pal,
You don’t have to
be hyperactive to
have adult ADHD.
You’ll find a list of
91 additional symptoms
associated with ADHD,
gathered from a study
we did over 7 years,
in the Appendix
(pp. 271–276).


Is It Possible That You Have AdHd? 7
classmate) had ADHD when we were kids, and he was constantly fidgety, restless,
and “hyper,” always acting out as if driven by a motor in some embarrassing way.
I’m not like that.
One of the things we’re beginning to understand well about adult ADHD
is that hyperactivity is seen more in kids with the disorder—but then it usually
declines substantially by adolescence and adulthood. Often the only thing that’s
left of hyperactivity in adults with ADHD is that feeling of restlessness and the
need to keep busy that you may know well.
If you think you might have ADHD, there are good reasons to seek an evalu-
ation:
✓ We’re coming up with lots of answers that could help you. Adult ADHD is
becoming well understood by science even though the disorder hasn’t
been recognized in adults for that long.
✓ This disorder can hurt you more than a lot of other psychological problems—
and it can hurt you every day, everywhere you go. ADHD is more limiting
for more patients in more areas of adult life than most other disorders seen
in outpatient mental health clinics. Left untreated, it can also lead to a
greater risk of mortality by midlife and a shortened overall life expectancy.
✓ And there’s a lot more help for ADHD than for a lot of other disorders that
affect adults—in the form of effective treatment options and coping strategies.
ADHD is one of the most treatable psychological disorders.
What we know about adults with ADHD comes straight from scientific fact:
• 
Data gathered since 1991 at the University of Massachusetts Medical
School, where one of the first clinics in the United States for adults with
ADHD was established, in 1990
• 
Evidence from a study of 158 children with ADHD (and 81 without it) fol-
lowed into adulthood, one of the largest such studies done before 2010
• 
Even more data from numerous studies done at Massachusetts General
Hospital, where another adult ADHD clinic was established around the
same time as my own clinic, in 1990
• 
Evidence from more than 100,000 scientific articles and books on adult
ADHD since the last edition of this book (2010)

8 To GeT STARTed, GeT evALuATed
How Long Have You Had These Problems?
If you think about how long you’ve been struggling to manage your time, to con-
centrate, and to control your impulses, would you say it’s been just weeks or months
or more like years? Picture yourself as a child: Were you dealing with any of the
same problems then? Do you remember also having trouble sitting still in school?
Completing your homework? Finishing a hobby project? Following the rules on a
playing field? Making and keeping friends in your neighborhood? Controlling your
emotions when you were frustrated or upset?
The adults with ADHD whom I’ve studied, diagnosed, and treated have
varying memories of the types of problems you checked off earlier. Many were
not diagnosed as kids. Prior to the 1980s the disorder wasn’t widely recognized by
clinicians. Sometimes their pediatrician didn’t believe ADHD was real. Or their
parents didn’t think “being hyper or not being able to focus was a reason to take a

varying memories of the types of problems you checked off earlier. Many were
not diagnosed as kids. Prior to the 1980s the disorder wasn’t widely recognized by
clinicians. Sometimes their pediatrician didn’t believe ADHD was real. Or their
parents didn’t think “being hyper or not being able to focus was a reason to take a
child to the doctor,” as one man diagnosed in his mid-20s reported. These people
(and their parents!) may have bought the myth that there was nothing wrong with
them that sheer willpower wouldn’t cure. Sometimes people end up undiagnosed
because they fall into a gray area between ADHD and non-ADHD symptoms or
because they had other problems that muddied the picture.
Going undiagnosed as a child doesn’t mean you don’t have ADHD.
Having less severe problems managing time, concentrat-
ing, and controlling your impulses and emotions than you did
as a child doesn’t mean you don’t have ADHD.
Being hyperactive as a child but not as an adult doesn’t
mean you don’t have ADHD.
But not having any ADHD symptoms as a child or teen
probably does mean you don’t have ADHD. ADHD-like symp-
toms that arose only in adulthood or that haven’t been going on for very long are
probably being caused by something else—a brain injury or other physical illness,
for example.
Of all cases of ADHD we’ve diagnosed in our various clinics and studies,
98% started before age 16.
If you don’t clearly remember having the same problems you just noted when
you were a child, is there someone who knew you well then that you can ask?
A parent? Brother or sister? Ironically, the same problems that make it hard for
Having sudden,
short-term symptoms
usually rules out ADHD.

Is It Possible That You Have AdHd? 9
people with ADHD to get things done on time, make wise choices, and even get
along with others can make it tough for them to trace their own history accu-
rately—at least until they’ve reached approximately their mid- to late 20s. I’ll
explain why in Step Two.
I didn’t have any problems as a child, and I haven’t had any brain inju-
ries. Isn’t it possible that ADHD hasn’t caused me any problems till now
because of my intelligence? I scored high on IQ tests in elementary school.
Except in school and possibly at work, intelligence is unlikely to protect you from
experiencing some of the impairments typically associated with ADHD, though it
may have allowed you to go further in school without your ADHD being noticed
than is common in typical adults who had ADHD growing up. Intelligence is not
the only factor involved in domains like family and social functioning, driving,
crime and drug use, dating and marital relationships, and, in fact, most others.
High intelligence wouldn’t necessarily have protected you in these areas if you had
ADHD symptoms. The sudden appearance of problems in adulthood is highly
likely to be caused by something other than ADHD.
Children and teens with ADHD that I’ve followed up into adulthood often
don’t know the extent of their own symptoms or how much those symptoms
are interfering with their life. It’s not until 27–32 years of age that adults
with ADHD become more consistent in what they say about them-
selves relative to what others say about them.
I think I may have ADHD now even though I didn’t have any concentra-
tion or other problems when I was younger. Maybe I was just compen-
sating for my ADHD in other ways?
In our research, the average number of major life activities

with ADHD become more consistent in what they say about them-
selves relative to what others say about them.
I think I may have ADHD now even though I didn’t have any concentra-
tion or other problems when I was younger. Maybe I was just compen-
sating for my ADHD in other ways?
In our research, the average number of major life activities
in which adults with ADHD said they were often impaired
was 6 or 7 out of 10. ADHD causes serious impairment
across all the domains of adult life, from education to work
to family. It would be nearly impossible to make it through
childhood, adolescence, and even early adulthood by
?
? 
Symptoms must have
lasted for at least
6 months to be considered
in diagnosing ADHD.

10 To GeT STARTed, GeT evALuATed
“compensating” somehow. Most professionals would have a hard time accepting
the idea that ADHD had not interfered with a person’s functioning in any major
domain of life until adulthood without strong evidence that parents and schools
had made extraordinary efforts to help. ADHD is defined by lack of compensa-
tion during the childhood years—not by successful compensation during those
years!
What Are Your Symptoms?
Only a qualified professional can help you fully answer this question. Still, check-
ing off any of the following questions that you’d answer “yes” will help you figure
out whether to pursue a diagnostic evaluation. In our research aimed specifically
at understanding adult ADHD, we’ve found the following nine criteria most accu-
rate in identifying the disorder.
Do you often . . .`
☐ Get easily distracted by extraneous stimuli or irrelevant thoughts?
☐ Make decisions impulsively?
☐ Have difficulty stopping activities or behavior when you should do so?
☐ Start a project or task without reading or listening to directions carefully?
☐ Fail to follow through on promises or commitments you make to others?
☐ Have trouble doing things in their proper order or sequence?
☐ Drive much faster than others—or, if you don’t drive,
have difficulty engaging in leisure activities or doing fun
things quietly?
☐ Have difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or recre-
ational activities?
☐ Have difficulty organizing tasks and activities?
Did you check off four of the first seven symptoms on the checklist, or six out
of all nine symptoms? If so, you are highly likely to have ADHD. In that case you
See Chapter
3 for information
on finding a
professional to
evaluate you.


Is It Possible That You Have AdHd? 11
should seek an evaluation from an experienced mental health professional if you
have not done so already.
How Do These Symptoms Affect Your Life?
ADHD is not a category that you either fall into or don’t. It is not like pregnancy.
It’s more like human height or intelligence. Think of it as a dimension, with dif-
ferent people falling at different points along it.
So where on that dimension is the division between
“disorder” and “no disorder”? It’s where impairment in
a major life activity occurs. Symptoms are the ways a
disorder expresses itself in thoughts and actions. Impair-
ments are the adverse consequences that result from
showing those symptoms. The table on the next page
lists typical impairments caused by ADHD in child-
hood and beyond.
Step Five gives
specific strategies
for preventing ADHD
symptoms from causing
the impairments listed
in the table.

The fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor-

showing those symptoms. The table on the next page
lists typical impairments caused by ADHD in child-
hood and beyond.
Step Five gives
specific strategies
for preventing ADHD
symptoms from causing
the impairments listed
in the table.

The fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor-
ders (DSM-5), published by the American Psychiatric Association in 2013,
uses 18 symptoms to diagnose ADHD—9 focusing on inattention and 9 on
hyperactivity– impulsivity. But that list (see the Appendix) was initially devel-
oped for use with children only. And while this latest edition of the manual
provides clarifications of some symptoms in parentheses for use with adults,
those clarifications were not tested until recently, when Laura Knouse and I
assessed how well they identify adults with ADHD and relate to the symptoms
they clarify. We found that they were only moderately or poorly related to the
original symptoms and should likely be ignored until more research is done on
them.
My associates and I have also found that the checklist of nine symptoms
provided above is more useful with adults than the symptom list in DSM-5.
A research colleague of mine, Stephen Faraone, has done an independent
study with his own groups of adults also showing that these symptoms were
very good at identifying those having ADHD.

12 To GeT STARTed, GeT evALuATed
Typical childhood impairments Typical adolescent and adult impairments
Family stress and conflict
Poor peer relationships
Few or no close friendships
Disruptive behavior in stores,
church, and other community
settings to the extent that you are
asked to leave or not return
Low regard for personal safety/
increased accidental injuries
Slow development of self-care
Slow development of personal
responsibility
Significantly lower than average
school performance
Significantly fewer years of
schooling
Poor functioning at work
Frequent job changes
Risky sexual behavior/increased teen
pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases
Difficulties managing anger and frustration in
intimate relationships
Unsafe driving (speeding, frequent accidents,
numerous parking violations, possible license
suspension)
Difficulties managing finances (impulsive
spending, excessive use of credit cards, poor
debt repayment, little or no savings, and so on)
Problems in dating or marital relationships
(don’t seem to listen to or appreciate the
needs of your partner, talk excessively and
interrupt, fail to follow through on promises and
commitments)
Prone to excessive use of substances such as
tobacco, alcohol, or marijuana
Difficulty getting to sleep at a reasonable
hour (insomnia), frequent night waking and
restlessness, inefficient sleep leading to
daytime tiredness
Less common but notable:
Antisocial activities (lying, stealing, fighting) that
lead to frequent police contact, arrests, and
even jail time; often associated with a greater
risk for illegal drug use and abuse
Generally less healthy lifestyle (less exercise;
more sedentary self- entertainment, such as
video games, TV, surfing the Internet; greater
use of social media; obesity, binge eating or
bulimia, poorer nutrition; greater use of nicotine
and alcohol); consequently increased risk for
later coronary heart disease

Generally less healthy lifestyle (less exercise;
more sedentary self- entertainment, such as
video games, TV, surfing the Internet; greater
use of social media; obesity, binge eating or
bulimia, poorer nutrition; greater use of nicotine
and alcohol); consequently increased risk for
later coronary heart disease

Is It Possible That You Have AdHd? 13
What’s Next?
Now you should have a fairly good idea of whether you might have ADHD and
should consider a professional evaluation:
☐ Do you have at least four to six of the nine symptoms now?
☐ Do they occur often in your current life?
☐ Have you been having these troubles for at least 6 months?
☐ Did they develop in childhood or adolescence (before 16 years of age)?
☐ Have your current symptoms resulted in adverse consequences (impair-
ment) in one or more major domains (such as education, work, social rela-
tionships, dating or marital relationships, managing your money, driving)?
☐ Did you experience adverse consequences from these symptoms in child-
hood?
If you can answer “yes” to all of these questions, there is a high probability
that you have ADHD. Read on to find out what you can do about it.

14
2
Can You Handle
the Problem
on Your Own?
Believing you might have ADHD can feel like a huge relief: At last you have some
idea of why your life has been so tough. Problem solved, right? All you have to do
now is read a couple books like this one so you know how to deal with the deficits
ADHD imposes.
Not so fast. There are some very powerful reasons to get professional help,
both for diagnosis and for treatment. This chapter will explain in more depth
what one man in his 30s put so plainly:
“I’ve tried extremely hard over the past few decades to deal with my ADHD on my
own and feel I’ve done OK. But now I think I need some help. I’m tired of being
a ‘skipping stone’ as far as careers go and would really like to settle and excel as I
KNOW I can.”
In brief, these are the reasons to get professional help:
✓ To make sure your symptoms aren’t being caused by a condition other
than ADHD that requires attention
✓ To discover whether your problems are being caused by a combination of
ADHD and another condition
✓ To get the prescription medication that’s proven to give a huge boost to
coping efforts if you do receive a diagnosis of ADHD
✓ To gain access to the latest psychological therapies that can address your
various problems with self-control

Can You Handle the Problem on Your own? 15
✓ To find out where your strengths and weaknesses are so you can aim your
coping efforts exactly where they’re needed
✓ To get an evaluation that can serve as the basis for getting appropriate
accommodations in college, other educational settings, or the workplace
under the Americans with Disabilities Act
✓ To access other resources that may help you change an unhealthy lifestyle
and poor health maintenance practices, such as assistance with weight
loss, quitting smoking, reducing alcohol or marijuana use, or improving
your sleep
All great reasons to form a relationship with a doctor who can prescribe the
right treatment for you and get you access to various services, protections, and
entitlements.
Convinced? If so, feel free to turn directly to Chapter 3. But if you need to
know more about why you should not try to handle this problem alone, read the
rest of this chapter.
Are Your Symptoms Being Caused by Something

right treatment for you and get you access to various services, protections, and
entitlements.
Convinced? If so, feel free to turn directly to Chapter 3. But if you need to
know more about why you should not try to handle this problem alone, read the
rest of this chapter.
Are Your Symptoms Being Caused by Something
Else, Like a Medical Problem?
Let’s go back to the idea that knowing you might have ADHD can be a relief.
We’ve found that finding a name and a neurobiological reason for many of your
struggles is, in itself, therapeutic. When you know what’s wrong, you can stop
beating yourself up for not being able to just shake off your
problems. But you can’t truly know you have ADHD with-
out that evaluation. Only a seasoned mental health pro-
fessional has the training and judgment to apply the diag-
nostic criteria you learned about in Chapter 1. Without
that kind of background, you won’t be able to factor in the
nuances that define the line between signs of ADHD and
symptoms that can be found to lesser degrees in the general population of adults.
Nor will you be familiar with the other psychological and psychiatric disorders
that cause problems with attention, concentration, and working memory so that
you can distinguish between those and ADHD.
Just as important, a qualified professional can direct you to any medical tests
or procedures you need to ensure that your symptoms are not a result of brain
injury or illness, as noted in Chapter 1.
Wouldn’t it be an even bigger
relief to
know you have
ADHD than to just
guess?

16 To GeT STARTed, GeT evALuATed
Does ADHD Explain Everything You’re
Going Through?
Even if Chapter 1 gave you a strong feeling that you have ADHD, you need a
professional evaluation to make sure ADHD tells the whole story. It would be
incredibly demoralizing to address ADHD and still struggle because some other
problem has gone undiscovered and untreated. If an evaluation turns up coexist-
ing disorders (called comorbidity), you’ll be given not only a diagnosis and some
information about your disorder(s) but also a list of treatment recommendations—
the first step on your way to leaving behind your life as a “skipping stone.”
Most adults with ADHD who are seen in clinics have at least two disorders:
80–85% have ADHD and one other disorder, and more than half may have
three psychological disorders.
Other Disorders That Co-Occur More Often in Those
with ADHD Than in the General Population
Anxiety disorders
Oppositional defiant disorder (ODD)
Conduct disorder (CD; aggression, delinquency, truancy, and the like)
Learning disabilities (LDs; delays in areas like reading, spelling, math, writing)
Demoralization, dysthymia, or outright major depression
Childhood- or adolescent-onset bipolar disorder
Adult antisocial personality disorder (ASPD)
Alcoholism and other addictions
Tic disorders or the more severe Tourette syndrome (multiple motor and
vocal tics)
Autism spectrum disorders

Learning disabilities (LDs; delays in areas like reading, spelling, math, writing)
Demoralization, dysthymia, or outright major depression
Childhood- or adolescent-onset bipolar disorder
Adult antisocial personality disorder (ASPD)
Alcoholism and other addictions
Tic disorders or the more severe Tourette syndrome (multiple motor and
vocal tics)
Autism spectrum disorders

Can You Handle the Problem on Your own? 17
The Most Effective Treatment—Medication—
Requires a Doctor’s Prescription
You can read all about the medications used to treat ADHD
in Step Three. What’s important to know right now is that
where ADHD symptoms are concerned, medication works.
It improves the symptoms, often substantially. It is effective
in a large percentage of adults—fewer than 10% will have no
positive response to any of the drugs approved for use with
ADHD. Medication even seems to temporarily correct or
compensate for the underlying neurological problems that are
likely contributing to the ADHD in the first place.
A lot of other treatments and coping methods have little effect unless the
person with ADHD is also taking medication. In my experience, adults with
ADHD who choose not to try medication following their diagnosis typically
return within 3–6 months asking to go on it once they realize that all the other
options are not addressing their problems very well.
Exactly What Are Your Strengths and Weaknesses?
A professional evaluation involves several steps. These steps are designed to look
at your difficulties from a number of angles to make sure important facts aren’t
overlooked or signs misinterpreted. But if the process seems repetitive or drawn
out to you, keep in mind that the evaluator is trying to rule out things that are
not causing you problems as well as identify what is causing you trouble. There’s
another reason to be patient with this process: In differentiating among all the
possible causes of your symptoms, the practitioner will also be unearthing valuable
information about your personal strengths. Knowing where you shine in life skills
The success rate for
ADHD medications is
probably unrivaled by
any other medication
treatment for any other
disorder in psychiatry.
Studies show that ADHD medications can:
• 
Normalize the behavior of 50–65% of those with ADHD
• 
Substantially improve the behavior of another 20–30% of people with the
disorder

18 To GeT STARTed, GeT evALuATed
and natural abilities will help you and your therapist choose coping strategies
that are tailored to help you most. Artistic talents and engaging personalities, for
instance, don’t come from having ADHD, but you can learn to use these gifts to
compensate for ADHD symptoms. Or you can identify a career path that draws
on these strengths.
I’ve met many representatives for pharmaceutical companies, for example,
who have ADHD but are outstanding in their work. The job allows them to travel
extensively and meet with lots of different physicians and their office staff, keep-
ing them engaged and on the go. A nine-to-five desk job might prove so boring
that they would be hard-pressed to concentrate and stay motivated to succeed
despite their natural talent for salesmanship and customer relations. But the con-
stant change of scene energizes and focuses these reps. Many also work in teams
with other reps to cover a region, which gives their work some structure that
would not be available to them in a solo sales position.

that they would be hard-pressed to concentrate and stay motivated to succeed
despite their natural talent for salesmanship and customer relations. But the con-
stant change of scene energizes and focuses these reps. Many also work in teams
with other reps to cover a region, which gives their work some structure that
would not be available to them in a solo sales position.
That’s what the evaluation process is all about: finding out exactly what’s
wrong and what you have going for you so that a treatment plan can be designed
to set you on the road to health and success as quickly as possible.

19
3
Where Can You Go
to Get Help?
If you haven’t yet had a diagnostic evaluation, you can seek a qualified mental
health professional on your own. But if you have a good relationship with your
primary care physician, a call to this doctor might be a fruitful first step. A doctor
who knows you well can use screening questionnaires to determine whether you’re
right to think you could have ADHD. If the doctor can rule out physical causes
for your symptoms, you’ve spared yourself the separate medical exam that a mental
health evaluator might recommend. And a physician who knows you well may be
able to refer you to an ADHD specialist who is likely to be a good fit for you. In
my experience, when you like and trust your doctor, you have a good chance of
feeling the same way about anyone the doctor recommends.
How to Find a Professional Who Is
Experienced with ADHD
Any of the following could be a good source of referrals. If one doesn’t pan out for
you, try one of the others.
✓ As mentioned above, you might start by calling your pri-
mary care provider (internist, family practitioner, or gen-
eral practitioner) to ask for the name of a specialist in your
area who is working in adult ADHD.
✓ Call your state psychiatric association or psychological
association. The state associations usually keep lists of
their professionals, organized by specialty. See if they have
any who are listed as experts focusing on ADHD in adults.
Go to
psych.org
or
apa.org
to find
your state’s
psychiatric or
psychological
association.


20 To GeT STARTed, GeT evALuATed
✓ Check the website of one of the major
nonprofit organizations dedicated to
ADHD: CHADD (United States) and
ADDA (United States and other English-
speaking countries). If either one has a
support group or chapter in your area, call
and ask if they know of any adult ADHD
clinical experts in your area.
✓ Call the local university medical school
psychiatry department. Even if it’s not
nearby, they can usually direct you to the
practitioners they know in your area who
do adult ADHD evaluations. Or go to
their website to see if ADHD is listed as
one of the disorders in which they spe-
cialize.
✓ Call the local hospital psychiatry department for the same information.
Or, again, go to their website to see if ADHD is listed as one of the disor-
ders in which they specialize.
✓ Call the local university psychology clinic for the same information. Or go
to their website to see if ADHD is listed as one of the disorders in which
they specialize.
✓ Call the county mental health center (usually listed in your phone book
under “county government”). Or go to their website to see if ADHD is
listed as one of the disorders in which they specialize.
✓ Check the yellow pages for psychiatrists and psychologists specializing
in adult ADHD. Or, better yet, go online and search for ADHD profes-

✓ Call the county mental health center (usually listed in your phone book
under “county government”). Or go to their website to see if ADHD is
listed as one of the disorders in which they specialize.
✓ Check the yellow pages for psychiatrists and psychologists specializing
in adult ADHD. Or, better yet, go online and search for ADHD profes-
sionals in your city or state. Physicians and psychiatrists can also specifi-
cally search their region for such professionals. Also both chadd.org and
additudemag.com provide options to search for ADHD professionals in
your area.
✓ Do you have a friend or relative you trust who is being treated for adult
ADHD? If so, ask for a referral to that person’s practitioner. Or if you
know someone whose child is being treated for ADHD, you might ask for
the child’s doctor’s name and call that clinician to see if he or she treats
adults or knows someone who does.
Website for Children and
Adults with Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder
(CHADD):
chadd.org
.
Website for the Attention
Deficit Disorder Association
(ADDA):
add.org.
Other websites that can be
useful in finding professionals
specializing in adult ADHD can
be found in the Resources at
the back of the book.


Where Can You Go to Get Help? 21
Questions to Ask before You Make an Appointment
If you’re lucky enough to have a number of specialists to choose from in your area,
you can ask the following questions when you call to inquire about an evaluation.
In fact, you might want to ask these questions even if you’ve located only one
professional nearby:
✓ What percentage of the doctor’s practice is made up of people with ADHD
(as opposed to other disorders)?
✓ If the practitioner sees both adults and children, what percentage are
adults?
✓ How long has the doctor been treating adults with ADHD?
✓ What is the practitioner’s area of specialization in medicine or psychology?
Fields that cover ADHD and related psychiatric disorders include psy-
chiatry, clinical psychology, neuropsychology, and neurology (especially
behavioral).
✓ Is the practitioner board certified in this area of specialization? Board cer-
tification is a higher level of certification than a state license to practice
medicine or psychology.
✓ How long will it take to get an appointment? (This may be significant to
you if you have a number of professionals to choose from and would like to
be seen as soon as possible.)
✓ Does the doctor treat people after diagnosing them? If not, where are
patients referred for treatment?
✓ Are other potential resources available nearby? Most mental health prac-
titioners will not have coaching, skills training, support groups, and the
like on site, but psychologists in private practice often rent space in office
parks where related professionals work, and they all refer patients to each
other.
✓ How does the doctor charge, and what insurance plans does he or she
accept?

titioners will not have coaching, skills training, support groups, and the
like on site, but psychologists in private practice often rent space in office
parks where related professionals work, and they all refer patients to each
other.
✓ How does the doctor charge, and what insurance plans does he or she
accept?

22
4
What Do You Need
for the Evaluation?
When you know what to expect, the evaluation process is likely to proceed more
smoothly and quickly.
Prepare by Knowing What to Expect
and What to Take Along
Here are the typical elements in a diagnostic evaluation:
✓ Collection of rating scales and referral information before or during the
evaluation
✓ An interview with you
✓ A review of previous records that may document your impairments
✓ Psychological testing to rule out general cognitive delay or LDs
✓ Interviews with others who know you well to corroborate your reports
✓ A general medical examination when medication might be part of your
treatment or coexisting medical conditions need to be evaluated (if your
physician hasn’t already done this)
What you can take along to facilitate these steps:
✓ Any records you have or can collect in advance from schools you attended
and physicians and mental health professionals you’ve seen, any driving
and criminal records, and any other documentation of problems that
could be related to ADHD or another disorder
✓ The names of a few people who know you well and whom you trust to
speak honestly and objectively with the evaluators

What do You need for the evaluation? 23
✓ Results of a medical exam if you’ve already had one from your physician
✓ A list of family members with mental disorders you know about
✓ A description of impairments during childhood and adolescence, as well
as more recent ones
Take Along an Open Mind
You’ve made this appointment because you want answers: Why
can’t you get done what adults need to do? Why do you keep strug-
gling despite huge efforts to “buckle down” and succeed? What will
it take for you to be able to reach important personal and profes-
sional goals? To provide these answers, the clinician you’ve made
an appointment with has to gather a lot of information from a
lot of sources. You may question the need for all of it. You might
feel restless in the middle of the evaluation, eager to get it over with. Try to stay
focused on the goal—answers and solutions—and remember that the most impor-
tant thing to take to your evaluation appointment is an open mind.
Go along with requests for school and other records, even though your aca-
demic history may be the last thing you want to revisit. Answer questions about
impairment as honestly as you can. Be open to letting the evaluator interview
someone else who knows you well to get a helpful outside perspective. Every test,
questionnaire, and interview included in the evaluation has a scientific basis and
is designed to provide the most reliable answers that the field of psychology can
deliver.
With all these tests, rating scales, questionnaires, past records, and inter-
views, the psychologist knows everything there is to know about me.
Why does she need to talk to one of my relatives too?
The short answer is that there’s strength in numbers. The more different sources
the evaluator can use to confirm your symptoms and the impairment you’ve suf-
fered, the firmer the conclusions that can be drawn. That’s why the evaluator

views, the psychologist knows everything there is to know about me.
Why does she need to talk to one of my relatives too?
The short answer is that there’s strength in numbers. The more different sources
the evaluator can use to confirm your symptoms and the impairment you’ve suf-
fered, the firmer the conclusions that can be drawn. That’s why the evaluator
doesn’t just talk to you; she also uses scientifically devised rating scales and other
tools to come at the information from as many angles as possible.
But even with all these tools, the evaluator is getting all the input from you.
The fact is that adults (and children) with ADHD often report doing better on
certain tasks than outside observation and objective measurements reveal. Driv-
ing is a particularly common example. You may very well believe you’re just as
good a driver as anyone else (or even better than average). You might feel those
Be prepared for the
initial evaluation
appointment to
take several hours.
?

24 To GeT STARTed, GeT evALuATed
speeding tickets you’ve piled up were unfair, written by a police officer who was
prejudiced against you or just trying to fill his quota for the month. Fender benders
you’ve had may seem like they were caused by the other driver, who wasn’t pay-
ing enough attention or who was too hesitant and therefore sent you misleading
signals. And all those parking tickets because you just didn’t have time to find a
legal spot—well, everyone gets those, don’t they? Someone who knows you well
and—this is essential—is in your corner and wants to help you, not just criticize
you, might be able to say that in fact you do drive much faster than most people,
that your attention sometimes drifts from the road, that you try to multitask or
text message while driving, and that you get impatient easily when traffic backs
up. On the surface it may feel like an intrusion but try to believe that it is in your
own best interest to let the professional speak about your concerns and your his-
tory with someone who knows you well, such as a parent, sibling, spouse or live-in
partner, or close friend if family members are not available. Without this perspec-
tive, it might appear that you do not have ADHD when in fact you actually do
have it, given the information that others can provide about you. Keep in mind
that you’re here to get answers—and accurate ones.
Why in the world would it matter that Aunt Ellen spent most of her life
depressed? What does that have to do with me?
Heredity (genes) contributes to most mental disorders to varying degrees. This
means that relatives of people with mental disorders are more likely to develop
the same disorders. The types of disorders seen in your relatives can serve as a
guide to the sorts of disorders you may be experiencing. ADHD is a highly genetic
disorder, more so than most in psychiatry, so unless you have acquired it through
an obvious brain injury in your past, it’s likely to be more common than usual
among your relatives. But because adults with ADHD frequently have another
disorder too (see Chapter 2), it can be helpful to the evaluator to know about all
mental disorders that appear on your family tree and for which you may have a
genetic vulnerability. If you’re not aware of any, that may be because in the past
people tended to view such information as private, even shameful. For this reason,
it’s worth taking the trouble to ask a parent or other relative from a generation

mental disorders that appear on your family tree and for which you may have a
genetic vulnerability. If you’re not aware of any, that may be because in the past
people tended to view such information as private, even shameful. For this reason,
it’s worth taking the trouble to ask a parent or other relative from a generation
before yours about the history of mental disorders in your family before you go to
your appointment.
Stay Focused on Getting Answers
Test taking may not hold great memories for you. But try to remember during the
string of psychological tests usually given that you and the evaluator share the
?

What do You need for the evaluation? 25
same goal: to get answers. You wouldn’t want those answers to be based on opinion
alone, so do your best to take these tests openly and honestly. On the other hand,
don’t let anyone tell you that the results of any one test are a foolproof indication
that you do or do not have ADHD. There is no diagnostic test for ADHD that is
accurate enough to be used in clinical practice. Diagnosis is an art as well as a sci-
ence. Accurate diagnosis depends on the adept analysis of a professional with the
experience to weigh the results gained from different sources and different parts
of the evaluation. This is the best way to get an accurate picture of your problem.
Psychological Tests Typically Given during an Evaluation
✓ Brief test of your intelligence or general cognitive ability: Sometimes people
struggle in school or at work because of limitations in their intellectual or learning
abilities. The professional needs to rule out these types of limitations as a cause of
or contributor to your ADHD-like symptoms or their impact on your educational
and work difficulties.
From 35 to 85% of people with ADHD can pass tests of attention, inhibition,
and working memory and yet still have the disorder. Researchers have found
that if people do poorly on these sorts of tests, they probably do have some
sort of disorder. That does not mean that it is ADHD, however, because other
disorders can interfere with performing these tests normally. On the other
hand, getting normal scores on these tests does not mean the professional
can rule out ADHD.
✓ Tests involving reading, math, and spelling: These are especially likely to be
given if you are in an educational setting, like college, technical training, or work-
related education. People with ADHD are far more likely than others to also have
specific delays in academic abilities such as these, often called specific learning
disabilities, and it’s important to know if you have them.
✓ Tests of attention, inhibition, and memory: Not all psychologists give these
tests. I don’t recommend their use for diagnosing ADHD as they are not suffi-
ciently accurate. The significance of the results can be exaggerated if it’s assumed
they are objective measures of ADHD and therefore more reliable than your own
oral reports of symptoms and the data from other parts of the evaluation. Abnor-
mal scores can indicate ADHD or other disorders—but that doesn’t mean that
normal scores alone rule out ADHD.

ciently accurate. The significance of the results can be exaggerated if it’s assumed
they are objective measures of ADHD and therefore more reliable than your own
oral reports of symptoms and the data from other parts of the evaluation. Abnor-
mal scores can indicate ADHD or other disorders—but that doesn’t mean that
normal scores alone rule out ADHD.

26
5
What Will the Evaluation
Tell You?
In most cases you’ll get the answers you came for on the spot, in a feedback confer-
ence that concludes the evaluation. In a few instances, if the results of any test-
ing done are not immediately available, the feedback conference may be delayed.
During the conference the professional will:
✓ Discuss the findings from all the information gathering
✓ Give you an opinion about whether you have ADHD or other problems
✓ Provide a set of recommendations for what to do about your ADHD and
any other problems uncovered
To render a diagnosis of adult ADHD, the professional must believe from the
evaluation’s findings that:
✓ You have high levels of inattention and/or
hyperactive and impulsive behavior
✓ You have these symptoms far more often
than other adults your age
✓ You’ve had these symptoms, in their current
form, for at least 6 months
✓ Your symptoms developed before you were
12–16 years old
✓ Your symptoms have had adverse consequences for you in many different
domains in both your childhood and your adult life
It’s possible to have ADHD
without having problems with
impulsivity or hyperactivity.
There’s a “presentation” of ADHD
characterized mainly by problems
with inattention. (More on this
presentation on pages 35–36.)

What Will the evaluation Tell You? 27
Do Your Symptoms Meet the Criteria for ADHD?
First and foremost, the evaluator will compare what he or she
has learned about your symptoms with the criteria for diagnos-
ing ADHD listed in the latest edition of the American Psychi-
atric Association’s DSM. According to the DSM, to be diag-
nosed with ADHD, you are supposed to have at least five of the
symptoms included in either of the two nine-item lists—one
centering on inattention and the other on hyperactivity–
impulsivity—mentioned in Chapter 1 and shown in the Appen-
dix. There are two problems with this guideline:
1. 
Lots of research has shown that many
people do have all the earmarks of
ADHD without having the full five
symptoms from either symptom list.
Several studies, my own included, have
shown that you actually need only four
of the symptoms on either list to be hav-
ing these problems to a degree inappro-
priate for an adult.
The full
DSM criteria for
diagnosing ADHD
are included in
the Appendix.

If the evaluator says you don’t have ADHD
because you have fewer than the five DSM
criteria, indicate that my research and that
of others has shown just four symptoms
is enough to be considered clinically
significant. Or ask to be evaluated again
using our nine-item list (page 10).
As my colleague Kevin Murphy, PhD, has written, your evaluation for ADHD
should be designed to answer four fundamental questions:
1. 
Is there credible evidence that you experienced ADHD-type symp-
toms in early childhood that, at least by the middle school years, led
to substantial and chronic impairment across settings?
2. 
Is there credible evidence that ADHD-type symptoms currently
cause you substantial and consistent impairment across settings?
3. 
Are there explanations other than ADHD that better account for your

toms in early childhood that, at least by the middle school years, led
to substantial and chronic impairment across settings?
2. 
Is there credible evidence that ADHD-type symptoms currently
cause you substantial and consistent impairment across settings?
3. 
Are there explanations other than ADHD that better account for your
array of current concerns?
4. 
If you meet the criteria for ADHD, is there evidence that you have any
other disorders as well?

28 To GeT STARTed, GeT evALuATed
2. 
These criteria were originally designed to diagnose children, not adults
(which I am well aware of since I was a member of the committee that
established them).
This is why my colleagues and I rely on the nine-criteria list you’ve already
read on page 10 as much as or more than the DSM-5 symptoms. It is based on
everything research has revealed about adults with ADHD and has already proven
effective in accurately diagnosing hundreds of adults in the 12 years since we first
identified this set of items as useful.
Essentially, the evaluation will translate your personal experiences into crite-
ria designed to separate those with ADHD from those without ADHD so you can
receive whatever help you need—and avoid being treated for a disorder you don’t
have.
Does the Diagnosis Sound Like You?
Let’s take a closer look at those abstract-sounding symptoms. ADHD basically
consists of problems in three separate areas that you may experience in these ways:
✓ Short attention span or lack of persistence on tasks: You may notice this
group of symptoms particularly when you are expected to do something tedious,
boring, or drawn out.
• 
Do you quickly get bored during repetitive tasks?
• 
Do you shift from one uncompleted activity to another (say, with
We used a variety of statistical methods to identify the symptoms that are
most essential in distinguishing the adults with ADHD. In doing so we com-
pared them not only to the community (“typical”) adults but to a second
control group of adults seen at the same mental health clinic who had other
psychological disorders but did not have ADHD. We also added into our analy-
ses the 18 items from the DSM to see just how good they were at identifying
ADHD in adults.
We found that, surprisingly, just nine of the 109 symptoms we identified
(see the Appendix) are needed to identify adults with ADHD—the nine you’ve
already seen in Chapter 1.

What Will the evaluation Tell You? 29
housecleaning, half making the bed and then emptying part of the
dishwasher and then dusting only one room)?
• 
Do you lose your concentration during a long task, finding it almost
impossible to write an in-depth report or fill out a tax return with its
many schedules and forms?
• 
Do you have a hard time getting in your sales or other status reports on
time without being “nagged” by your boss?
Many people with ADHD describe a double whammy in this area: They
can’t seem to concentrate long enough to finish routine tasks, and they’re also
distracted by virtually anything else that enters their field of consciousness. Some-
one enters their peripheral vision, their eye follows, and their mind goes along for
the ride, never to return from its detour. Or unbidden and unwelcome irrelevant
thoughts suddenly pop into their head, and their mind wanders off on a tangent
that takes them so far off course that they lose tons of time.
✓ Impaired ability to control impulses and delay gratification:

one enters their peripheral vision, their eye follows, and their mind goes along for
the ride, never to return from its detour. Or unbidden and unwelcome irrelevant
thoughts suddenly pop into their head, and their mind wanders off on a tangent
that takes them so far off course that they lose tons of time.
✓ Impaired ability to control impulses and delay gratification:
• 
Do people criticize you for not “looking before you leap”?
• 
Is “What were you thinking?” a question you hear at least a couple times
a week because of something you said or did without much regard for
the consequences?
• 
Have you embarrassed yourself by interrupting others, blurting out
comments you wish you had bitten back, or dominating the conversa-
tion until everyone else leaves in disgust?
• 
Do you put off necessary errands when there’s a line at the bank, the
post office, or the supermarket checkout?
• 
Do you always have a second piece of cake or other fattening food even
though you really want to lose 10 pounds?
• 
Do you spend your paycheck every weekend instead of saving for the ski
equipment or some other large item that you want or need?
Many teens and adults with ADHD tend to speed when they drive, to lose
patience with other drivers and drive aggressively, to rack up parking tickets
because they just can’t be bothered to find a legal parking space, and generally to
have a very low tolerance for frustration. Is this you?

30 To GeT STARTed, GeT evALuATed
✓ Excessive or uncontrolled activity or activity that’s irrelevant to the task at
hand: Most—but not all—adults with ADHD were fidgety, restless, and “on the
go” as children.
• 
Do you remember moving in ways that weren’t needed to complete the
task you were assigned, such as wriggling your feet and legs, squirming
in your seat, tapping your hands or feet, touching things frequently,
rocking, or often shifting your position while performing relatively bor-
ing tasks?
If this was part of your childhood experience, you may be aware that it’s
changed as you’ve matured: maybe now you would describe yourself as restless,
antsy, always needing to be busy.
How Are Those Symptoms Really
Affecting Your Life?
Symptoms alone aren’t enough to produce a diagnosis of ADHD. You have to be
impaired by those symptoms.
Earlier I called impairment the adverse consequences that can result from your
behavior or symptoms. They involve the environment kicking back, so to speak,
as a result of your displaying such behavior. These can involve just about anything
Impairment = the social and other adverse consequences or costs that result
from expressing the symptoms of ADHD.
But there’s another element to the term that’s just as important as this
definition: Impairment is defined relative to the average person in the popu-
lation, known as the norm—it is where most “normal,” or typical, people are
found to be performing in any domain of life. It does not mean how you are
functioning compared to incredibly bright or highly educated people even if
you are one. To be impaired, you must be functioning significantly below the
norm or the average (typical) person. Why? Because the term disorder means
just that—you are not functioning typically.

found to be performing in any domain of life. It does not mean how you are
functioning compared to incredibly bright or highly educated people even if
you are one. To be impaired, you must be functioning significantly below the
norm or the average (typical) person. Why? Because the term disorder means
just that—you are not functioning typically.

What Will the evaluation Tell You? 31
that can be negatively affected in your life. If you look at the 91 symptoms listed
in the Appendix, it will give you an idea of how many different ways ADHD could
be expressing itself in your life. I suspect you already know what the adverse con-
sequences of those symptoms can be.
Having trouble resisting impulses might lead to extramarital affairs and con-
sequently divorce. It might make you buy things you can’t afford but think you
can’t live without at the moment. It could lead you to abandon simple obligations
like child care or personal hygiene. Difficulty taking constructive criticism and
making changes based on feedback from authority figures can leave you stalled in
your career (or fired) and getting less out of educational opportunities than you
could. Having a poor grasp of time can leave you missing important appointments
and celebrations, compromising your personal as well as professional relationships.
Problems with memory, reading comprehension, and mental arithmetic can make
even the most basic daily tasks a frustrating challenge to complete. Overreacting
emotionally can cause problems in every arena of your life, robbing you of chances
to contribute to your community through civic or volunteer work, making you sus-
ceptible to road rage, and potentially costing you jobs, friends, and more intimate
relationships. These are just a few examples of the damage that ADHD symptoms
can do.
Can You Accept the Professional’s Conclusions?
We’re all human, and part of being human is going into certain situations with our
minds made up—or at least with a healthy dose of skepticism. If you approached
the evaluation with a strong opinion about whether you do or do not have ADHD,
that opinion could very well color your reaction to the professional’s feedback.
Here are a few things to think about before rejecting the opinion of the profes-
sionals you’re consulting:
ADHD symptoms can cause impairments in every domain of your life:
Home Work Social life Community Education
Dating/marriage Money management Driving Leisure activities
Sexual behavior Child rearing Daily responsibilities

32 To GeT STARTed, GeT evALuATed
The “Everyone Has ADHD Symptoms” Myth
That ADHD is a legitimate, real disorder has been questioned repeatedly over
the years. Naysayers argue that typical individuals in the general population have
the same kinds of symptoms and impairments that supposedly exist only in those
diagnosed with the disorder. It’s true that people who would be considered the
norm may show some of the behavioral characteristics of ADHD once in a while.
Everyone feels particularly distractible on some days or has trouble concentrating
on others. What distinguishes adults with ADHD from others is the considerably
greater frequency with which they display these characteristics. Distractibility,
inability to concentrate, and other problems reach a point of being developmen-
tally inappropriate (rare) for their age group.
My colleagues and I published a book in 2008 containing a study in which we

on others. What distinguishes adults with ADHD from others is the considerably
greater frequency with which they display these characteristics. Distractibility,
inability to concentrate, and other problems reach a point of being developmen-
tally inappropriate (rare) for their age group.
My colleagues and I published a book in 2008 containing a study in which we
asked 146 adults diagnosed with ADHD and 109 adults from a general commu-
nity sample to tell us whether they had experienced the 18 DSM symptoms often.
The answers are shown in the table on the facing page.
Clearly the vast majority of typical adults do not report having these prob-
lems often. There is a quantifiable, statistically significant, and noticeable differ-
ence between the experiences of those diagnosed with ADHD and others.
In the same study, we asked adults with ADHD and those in the community
population in what domains of life they were often impaired by ADHD symptoms.
The results we got are in the table on page 34.
For every one of these major life activities more of the adults with ADHD
reported being impaired than did the adults in the general population. In most
areas, a substantial majority reported that they were “often” impaired.
The same people who claim that so-called ADHD symptoms are problems
Adults with ADHD versus typical adults:
• 
Fewer than 10% of the typical adults answered “yes” to all but two of
these questions.
• 
12% or fewer did so for the other two questions.
• 
On average, adults in the general-population control group reported less
than 1 symptom out of all 18, whereas adults with ADHD reported more
than 12 (7 on the inattention list and 5 on the hyperactive– impulsive list).

What Will the evaluation Tell You? 33
that all adults have often claim that
these symptoms (and impairments) are
even more pronounced and prevalent
in “typical” children than “typical”
adults. ADHD is not a disorder, they
say, but just a set of problems widely
experienced by the general popula-
tion, especially in childhood. Not so,
our study showed.
Symptom
Adults with
ADHD (%)
Adults in the
community (%)
Inattention symptoms
Fails to give close attention to details 74 3
Difficulty sustaining attention 97 3
Fails to listen when spoken to directly 73 2
Doesn’t follow through on instructions 75 1
Has difficulty organizing tasks 81 5
Avoids tasks requiring sustained mental effort 81 2
Loses necessary things 75 11
Easily distracted by extraneous stimuli 97 2
Forgetful in daily activities 78 4
Hyperactive– impulsive symptoms
Fidgets with hand/feet or squirms in seat 79 4
Leaves seat when required to stay seated 30 2
Feels restless 77 3
Difficulty doing leisure activities quietly 38 3
Has to be “on the go” 62 12
Talks excessively 44 4
Blurts out answers 57 7
Difficulty awaiting turn 67 3
Interrupts or intrudes on others 57 3
You can find the results of our studies
comparing symptoms and domains where
impairments occurred in
children
with and
without ADHD in a book I wrote with Kevin
Murphy and Mariellen Fischer,
ADHD in Adults:
What the Science Says
(Guilford Press, 2008).
The table of 91 symptoms in the Appendix
also shows a huge disparity between adults
with and without ADHD.


comparing symptoms and domains where
impairments occurred in
children
with and
without ADHD in a book I wrote with Kevin
Murphy and Mariellen Fischer,
ADHD in Adults:
What the Science Says
(Guilford Press, 2008).
The table of 91 symptoms in the Appendix
also shows a huge disparity between adults
with and without ADHD.


34 To GeT STARTed, GeT evALuATed
When You Don’t Quite Fit the Picture of ADHD
The professional who evaluates you may tell you that you seem to have a particular
“presentation” of ADHD but that he or she is not sure. Currently, DSM-5 divides
ADHD into three presentations:
1. 
Predominantly hyperactive
2. 
Predominantly inattentive
3. 
Combined
The trouble is, this subdivision sometimes muddies the diagnostic waters
because the groups overlap and may represent a range of severity rather than three
distinct types, and people can move across these presentations, just as a function
of time. So don’t view these presentations as being somehow qualitatively different
forms of the disorder that are stable over time—they are not.
To confuse matters further, 30–50% of those who seem to have the predomi-
nantly inattentive presentation of ADHD may not have ADHD at all but some-
thing that some researchers, including me, now call a “sluggish cognitive tempo”
(SCT), a separate deficiency in a different type of attention.
Do you think you might have the following tendencies, some of which seem
like the opposite of ADHD?
Domain of life
Adults with
ADHD (%)
Adults in the
community (%)
Home life 69 2
Work or occupation 75 2
Social interactions 56 1
Community activities 44 1
Educational activities 89 1
Dating or marital activities 73 1
Money management 73 1
Driving 38 2
Leisure activities 46 1
Daily responsibilities 86 2

What Will the evaluation Tell You? 35
☐ Daydreaming
☐ Being spacey
☐ Staring frequently
☐ Being slow moving, hypoactive, lethargic, and sluggish
☐ Being easily confused or mentally “foggy”
☐ Being slow to process information and prone to making mistakes in doing
so
☐ Having a poor focus of attention or being unable to distinguish what is
important from what is not in information that has to be processed quickly
The three presentations of ADHD as of 2013:
• 
The combined presentation is the most common (approximately 65% or
more of clinical cases) and the most severe and involves 10 or more of
all the characteristics noted in the 18 DSM criteria (5+ for inattention and
5+ for hyperactive– impulsive). It’s also the most extensively studied of the
“types” of ADHD, with thousands of scientific studies on this group pub-
lished over the last 100 years.
• 
The predominantly hyperactive presentation was recognized in 1994.
People with this type of ADHD don’t have sufficient problems with inat-
tentiveness to be diagnosed with the combined type. It shows up mainly
as difficulties with impulsive and hyperactive behavior and is most often
seen in preschool children, even before their inattention becomes obvi-
ous. It’s now believed to represent simply an early developmental stage
of the combined presentation in most cases. As many as 90% of these
people will develop enough problems with attention and distractibility
to be diagnosed eventually with the combined presentation within 3–5
years. The remaining cases appear to mostly represent a milder variant
of the combined presentation.
• 
Individuals who exhibit chiefly attention problems but not excessive activ-

people will develop enough problems with attention and distractibility
to be diagnosed eventually with the combined presentation within 3–5
years. The remaining cases appear to mostly represent a milder variant
of the combined presentation.
• 
Individuals who exhibit chiefly attention problems but not excessive activ-
ity levels or poor impulse control are considered to have the predomi-
nantly inattentive presentation of ADHD. First recognized around 1980,
this subgroup makes up about 30% or more of clinically referred cases.
Many of these cases are just milder forms of the combined presentation.

36 To GeT STARTed, GeT evALuATed
☐ Having more problems consistently remembering information that was
previously learned
☐ Being more socially reticent, shy, or withdrawn than others
☐ Being more passive or even hesitant instead of being impulsive (like the
more typical combined type of ADHD)
☐ Having a pattern of comorbid disorders that differs from that commonly
seen in ADHD, such as:
☐ Rarely showing social aggression (ODD)
☐ Less likely to be antisocial or have CD (frequent lying, stealing, fight-
ing, and so forth)
☐ More likely to be depressed and possibly anxious
☐ LDs or impaired schoolwork due to making errors rather than reduced
productivity or disruptive class behavior
If this pattern seems like it might fit you, ask the professional who evaluated
you. So little is known scientifically about this syndrome that it won’t be discussed
further in this book. See the Fact Sheets page on my website (russellbarkley.org)
for more information.
What If You Still
Disagree with the Professional’s Conclusions?
You’ve now read all about ADHD and how it’s diagnosed. Maybe you’ve received
a diagnosis yourself. Are you ready to own this disorder? It’s the only way to seek
appropriate treatment and get on with the kind of life you want and deserve.
When Is a Second Opinion Warranted?
If you find yourself disagreeing with the results of your first evaluation, ask yourself
honestly whether you disagree because your professional did such a poor or cursory
job evaluating you or concluded things about your behavior that you know are
simply not true. If so, you should seek a second opinion.
But even if the evaluation was done responsibly and well, and the feedback
you were given sounds like it describes you, you may disagree with the label. The
problem may be your preconceived notions or your own attempts at self-diagnosis.
Sometimes people seek professional evaluations believing they have a particular

What Will the evaluation Tell You? 37
disorder, such as bipolar disorder, only to be told by the professional that what
they really have is ADHD. When the professional’s diagnosis conflicts with what
they originally believed, it can be hard to accept. In a case like this, you can surely
seek a second opinion. But know that you’re not likely to be satisfied with that
one either, because it will again disagree with your self-diagnosis. Second opinions
are reasonable to pursue as long as you have solid, rational grounds on which to
question the initial evaluation and disagree with its conclusions.
If you’re tempted to seek a second opinion because you think you do have
ADHD but the professional says you don’t, see the sidebar on pages 38–39.
A Final Reality Check
If you’ve received a diagnosis of ADHD but are not quite ready to own the disor-
der, take a look at these fast facts. You’re not alone:

If you’re tempted to seek a second opinion because you think you do have
ADHD but the professional says you don’t, see the sidebar on pages 38–39.
A Final Reality Check
If you’ve received a diagnosis of ADHD but are not quite ready to own the disor-
der, take a look at these fast facts. You’re not alone:
✓ ADHD occurs in approximately 5–8% of the childhood population and
4–5% of adults, or as many as 13.6 million as of 2020.
✓ In childhood it is three times more common in boys than girls, but by
adulthood the ratio of males to females is approximately 1.6 to 1 or less.
✓ The disorder is found in all countries and ethnic groups studied to date.
✓ ADHD is somewhat more common in urban and population-dense regions
than in suburban or rural settings and is found across all social classes.
✓ ADHD is more common among people in certain professions, such as
the military, the trades, the performing arts, and sales, and among pro-
fessional athletes, physical education teachers, and entrepreneurs, than
among those in other fields.
Being among this group is not necessarily devastating news. There’s a lot of help
available. But that help requires that you acknowledge, accept, and own the diag-
nosis of ADHD as being a part of who you are. Otherwise, you will be far less
committed to seeking appropriate treatment or to following through on the advice
you get from professionals.
Ready to start getting that help?

38 To GeT STARTed, GeT evALuATed
What If the Professional Says You Don’t Have ADHD but
You Believe You Do?
There’s a funny thing about ADHD: perhaps because its impact on achieve-
ment is so well known, many people blame the disorder when they don’t
meet their own standards for accomplishment. Do any of these people
sound like you?
Joe decided to become a doctor when he was in high school. So he
chose a college with a great biology department and a high rate of admis-
sion to medical schools. He got into that university only on the waiting list,
but at least he got in. Once he was there, though, every science course was
a struggle for him. By junior year his GPA was hovering under a 3.0, and
he had already taken organic chemistry three times without passing. Joe
started to wonder what in the world was wrong with him: he worked so hard,
he wanted this so badly, and he was just as intelligent as the next guy, wasn’t
he? By the time Joe had graduated from college and taken the MCAT with
disappointing results, he was convinced there was something really wrong
with him. An awful lot of his fellow students seemed to have glided along the
path that Joe had carved out for himself, yet he was stalled. It was looking
like he might never get into medical school. So Joe decided to have himself
evaluated for ADHD. The more he read about it, the more he thought this
explained his whole problem. The evaluator disagreed. So did the one from
whom Joe sought a second opinion. And the third.
Carrie fell into a similar trap. Identified as “gifted” when young, she had
been brought up to believe that she should be gifted in doing just about
everything in life. When Carrie started hopping from one type of job to
another after college, she and her family decided she might have ADHD,
which was the only explanation they could come up with for why she kept
failing at jobs that should, according to her IQ, be a snap for her. As it turned
out, ADHD wasn’t the problem, but anxiety was. Carrie didn’t like to admit

another after college, she and her family decided she might have ADHD,
which was the only explanation they could come up with for why she kept
failing at jobs that should, according to her IQ, be a snap for her. As it turned
out, ADHD wasn’t the problem, but anxiety was. Carrie didn’t like to admit
that she found herself almost paralyzed by fear when she started a new job
and that this made it really hard for her to concentrate on her work. Fortu-
nately, the evaluator from whom she sought a diagnosis of ADHD discovered
the real problem and was able to refer her to a therapist who specialized in
anxiety disorders. This therapist not only offered treatment and coping strat-
egies but helped Carrie accept her diagnosis without shame.
Cal didn’t have any particular reason—such as an IQ score or com-
parison to a peer group—for believing that he had ADHD other than that
he was currently in a dead-end job, changed jobs often and impulsively, and

What Will the evaluation Tell You? 39
had very few friends and no girlfriend. He believed his life should be different
and had apparently cast around over the years for an explanation for why it
wasn’t. My colleagues and I have seen numerous people like Cal, who simply
feel that if they’re not getting what they want out of life, there must be some
psychological deficit at work. None of us can explain this phenomenon; it’s
almost the opposite of the TV singing-contest shows where the contestant
clearly can’t stay on key and yet believes rigidly that she’s destined for vocal
stardom: in this case the person believes he cannot perform well in life when
in fact he does perform as well as most people, even if it is not up to his own
internal standard.
To adopt a standard for defining the term impairment other than com-
parison with the true norm is like something out of Alice in Wonderland,
where nothing is as it seems, and words can have whatever meaning one
wishes to give them. Saying that a person functioning as well as or even bet-
ter than the average or typical population can still be considered impaired
makes a mockery of the term disorder and does a disservice to those strug-
gling with really not being able to function as well as the norm.
If the professional says you do not have ADHD, any of the following could
be responsible for ADHD-like symptoms:
• Being over age 55 or perimenopausal, when increased forgetfulness,
distractibility, and disorganization are normal
• Recent medical problems, such as thyroid dysfunction, otitis media,
sleep disorder or apnea, or strep throat (though this particular con-
nection is rare)
• Excessive recreational drug use (marijuana, alcohol, cocaine, meth-
amphetamine, and so on), which can result in attention, memory, and
organizational problems
• Unusual stress, though the ADHD-like symptoms would then be tem-
porary
• Injury to the regions of the brain responsible for sustained attention,
behavioral inhibition, working memory, and emotional self-control
Any of these possible causes should have been uncovered by the eval-
uation, and the practitioner should refer you to the appropriate professionals
to follow up on them.

• Injury to the regions of the brain responsible for sustained attention,
behavioral inhibition, working memory, and emotional self-control
Any of these possible causes should have been uncovered by the eval-
uation, and the practitioner should refer you to the appropriate professionals
to follow up on them.



41
Step Two
Change Your
Mindset
Know and own Your AdHd
Having a diagnosis of ADHD is like holding a passport to a better life. It gives
you access to:
• Medication that will help you concentrate, persevere, manage your time,
and resist distractions that pull you away from what you want and need
to do—and in doing so significantly reduce your risks for various adverse
consequences and thus improve your quality of life and even life expec-
tancy
• Specific types of psychological therapies that can target your ADHD-
related difficulties and, in combination with medication, optimize man-
agement of this disorder
• Coaching by counselors and other professionals specializing in life-
coaching for adults with ADHD to help them set and fulfill their goals,
improve their health and lifestyle, and further maximize the effects of the
other treatments
• Strategies for playing up your strengths
• Tools that can help you compensate for weaknesses
• Coping skills that will boost your success in specific arenas, from work to
home

42 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
• Support from peers and experts who want you to realize your dreams and
reach your goals
• Accommodations in college, other educational settings, or even in your
workplace that you may require and be entitled to under the Americans
with Disabilities Act
The rest of this book lays out your options for getting each type of help—
where to go, what to do, how to use available resources. But that’s just half of what
you need to make treatment and support work best for you. The other half com-
prises knowing yourself and the ADHD that you have. And to know your ADHD,
you have to truly own it.
Accepting ADHD as part of your psychological makeup is what I mean by
“owning your ADHD.” If you merely acknowledge the disorder at some distant
intellectual level, paying public lip service to the diagnosis but privately rejecting
it, you’ll be stuck where you are. People I’ve seen react that way don’t embrace
treatment. They’ve wasted time and money on the diagnosis and end up with the
same struggles they’ve always had.
I find, in fact, that accepting the diagnosis can be
rather liberating for adults. They no longer have to play
mind games with themselves or others in which they
deny, excuse, defend, distort, massage, or in other ways
avoid accepting the disorder. I am bald, color blind to
reds and greens by about 60% or more, not well coor-
dinated, cannot draw or paint a lick, am not very
mechanically inclined or talented, am musically rather
inept, now have to wear glasses, have nearly completely gray hair (what is left
of it), find the remainder now migrating south into my nose and ears, and am
developing a slow but progressive left facial weakness when talking, among other
psychological and physical inadequacies I certainly possess. And I am fine with
owning them, warts and all. None prevents me from working, socializing, and
otherwise engaging my life fully. Because when I decided to own my inadequacies,
my next thought was “So what? No one is perfect; big deal. Now just own it and
get on with life.”
I hope you can do the same: get on with all the learning, loving, living, and

owning them, warts and all. None prevents me from working, socializing, and
otherwise engaging my life fully. Because when I decided to own my inadequacies,
my next thought was “So what? No one is perfect; big deal. Now just own it and
get on with life.”
I hope you can do the same: get on with all the learning, loving, living, and
leaving a legacy that a happy and productive life ought to entail. Happiness or
at least contentment can come only from accepting yourself as you are, and that
Mental avoidance of the
diagnosis wastes enormous
amounts of time and emotional
energy as well as opportunities
for a far better life.

CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT 43
includes ADHD. Owning your ADHD doesn’t have to demoralize you, because
when you really own it, you too can then conclude “So what?!” Admit that you
have it, accept the diagnosis, own it as you own other features of your self-image,
and then you can really begin to work with and master it. You can’t work with
something you won’t own and don’t even know much about. So embrace under-
standing your ADHD, owning it as part of who you really are, and then working
to diminish its adverse effects on your life to improve your chances of leading a
meaningful, effective, and successful life.
If you haven’t accepted that you have ADHD, you can’t get all those things
listed at the beginning of Step Two that should be the benefits of getting a diagno-
sis. Accepting your ADHD can lead to:
• Being able to seek help
• Discussing ADHD rationally with others
• Evaluating what types of accommodations, if any, you may need at work,
school, or home
• Adapting to the condition
• Coping with it as necessary
In my years of counseling adults with ADHD, I’ve come to believe that
reframing your view of yourself and your life to put ADHD in the picture is in
fact among the most crucial changes you can make to master ADHD. It’s the only
way I know to keep ADHD from running, or ruining, your life. Unfortunately,
accepting ADHD as part of who you are may be a tall order if you’ve been trying
to explain your problems in some other way or people have been telling you forever
that there’s nothing wrong with you that couldn’t be fixed with a little willpower.
Fortunately, changing your perspective on ADHD is not a single leap you need
to make. It’s a process: You start by coming to know it, then you own it, and finally
you’re able to work with it.



45
6
Know Your ADHD
Let’s start with knowledge about ADHD:
Knowledge Is Power
Read this book. Try to commit to taking the time. I’ve bro-
ken the book down into manageable chunks with lots of
visually stimulating callouts, but you can always skip over
the boxes, lists, and charts and go back to them later. Set
a goal of reading a chapter or number of chapters of text
every day—even skimming at first—to be sure you finish it.
If you have one, try setting your computer, phone, or wrist-
watch alarm to remind you to read for 15 minutes at a certain
time every day.
Take advantage of the extra sources of information
listed throughout this book. You’ll also find a comprehensive
list in the Resources at the back of the book.
Be skeptical. If you read enough, you’ll be able to decide
for yourself what makes sense in what you read. To para-
phrase another author, truth is an assembled thing, so read
widely and rely on a variety of sources, and the most con-
sistent and reliable information will filter through to you. The

Be skeptical. If you read enough, you’ll be able to decide
for yourself what makes sense in what you read. To para-
phrase another author, truth is an assembled thing, so read
widely and rely on a variety of sources, and the most con-
sistent and reliable information will filter through to you. The
information at the end of Chapter 11 will help you become
better informed without wasting time sifting through misin-
formation, exaggerated claims, and outright falsehoods.

46 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
What Goes Wrong Psychologically
When You Have ADHD?
What causes ADHD, as far as we know, is neurological (in
the brain) and hereditary (in the genes). As the box on
pages 103–105 describes, brain-imaging technology is
already showing differences in brain development in those
with ADHD. We also know that ADHD can arise from
brain injuries and not just brain development problems.
And we also know from genetic studies—such as studies
of biological family members and even identical versus
nonidentical twins—that the disorder is highly heritable.
Now you can forget about what caused you to have ADHD. It’s too late to
change that. Knowing what goes wrong as a result of those causes, however, can
help you target treatments and coping methods very specifically.
Research that my colleagues and I did over a couple of decades showed us
that ADHD causes a lot more problems than can be summed up by the 18 symp-
toms found in the DSM. Those 18 are used by most clinicians to diagnose ADHD,
and yet we found 91 more (listed in the Appendix) that cropped up in a lot of people
with ADHD. That certainly helped to explain why ADHD can be so hard to diag-
nose. But what did this abundance of symptoms mean? Now that we had identi-
fied them, how could we use this long list to understand ADHD better?
My work and that of others has shown that all these problems seem to cluster
together into three categories. ADHD appears to be a combination of:
Brain-imaging
technology is a
group of methods
by which the live
brain is scanned to
produce pictures of
its structures and the
activity going on inside.

Studies have shown that you probably inherited ADHD:
• 
Ten to 35% of the immediate family members of children with ADHD also
have the disorder.
• 
When a parent has ADHD, up to 40–57% of his or her biological children
will also have ADHD. This means if you have a parent with ADHD, you are
eight times more likely to end up with ADHD than if your parent does not
have ADHD. Likewise, if you have ADHD, your offspring are up to eight
times more likely to have it also.

Know Your AdHd 47
✓ Poor inhibition
✓ Poor self-regulation
✓ Problems with executive functions—those mental abilities that allow us to
regulate our own behavior
As you’ll discover in the rest of Step Two, these three are interrelated. Poor
inhibition leads to poor self-regulation, and problems with executive functions
can produce seven different types of self-control problems. I now believe that it all
comes down to self-regulation. However, I think you’ll find it easier to understand
your own unique version of ADHD if you look at it within the framework of these
three problem areas.
Here’s a sampling of the symptoms that fall into these categories. How many
do you experience?
Poor inhibition
✓ Find it difficult to tolerate waiting; impatient
✓ Make decisions impulsively
✓ Make off-the-cuff comments to others
✓ Have difficulty stopping my activities or behavior when I should do so

Here’s a sampling of the symptoms that fall into these categories. How many
do you experience?
Poor inhibition
✓ Find it difficult to tolerate waiting; impatient
✓ Make decisions impulsively
✓ Make off-the-cuff comments to others
✓ Have difficulty stopping my activities or behavior when I should do so
Poor self-regulation
✓ Can’t seem to wait for a payoff or to put off doing things that are rewarding
now so as to work for a later goal
✓ Likely to do things without considering the consequences of doing them
✓ Likely to skip out on work early if it’s boring or to do something more fun
✓ Start a project or task without reading or listening to the directions care-
fully
Problems with executive functions
✓ Poor sense of time
✓ Forget to do things I am supposed to do
✓ Unable to comprehend what I read as well as I should be able to; have to
reread material to get its meaning

48 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
✓ Get frustrated or emotionally upset easily
✓ Am poorly organized—my life and things seem in constant disarray
✓ Have trouble planning for and meeting goals I set for myself or carrying
out tasks I agree to do for others
This is just a sampling, but I think you can probably see from these examples
that poor inhibition basically means you have difficulty stopping yourself long
enough to think about what you’re about to do. Without that pause, you can’t
exercise much self-control. Self-control means any response or set of responses
that you direct at yourself and your own likely behavior that would lead you to do
something different from what your first impulse would dictate. Think of inhibi-
tion as your psychological braking system. You put on that brake and slow down
long enough to decide whether the intersection you’re approaching is clear and
it’s safe to drive through, as well as just how effective what you are planning to do
is likely to be. Self-control might mean coming to a full stop and waiting till the
traffic clears even though you’re in a hurry and would like to try to drive unsafely
around it.
Executive functions are the specific self-directed actions that we use to con-
trol ourselves. They are the mental abilities that we all use to consider our past
and then anticipate the future and guide our behavior toward it. They work like a
GPS in your brain, giving you the step-by-step instructions that you need to get to
your destination. Scientists divide them up and label them differently, but execu-
tive functions generally include abilities like inhibition, self-awareness, working
memory, emotional self-regulation, self-motivation, planning, and problem solving
when obstacles to our goals are encountered along the way. After inhibiting the
impulse to act, we turn on these abilities during that pause. It’s important to know
that using these abilities takes will and effort. They are not easy and automatic.
These executive functions help us decide exactly what to do when we exert self-
control. Think of them as your mental GPS (planning and self-monitoring your
progress) when combined with your gas pedal (motivation), brake (self-restraint or
inhibition), and steering wheel (mental guidance).
The Five Areas of Difficulty
in Managing Daily Activities
It’s easier to see how thoroughly poor inhibition, poor self-control, and executive
function problems can invade your life if you look at the difficulties that they
cause in the following five major areas. Quickly check off which of these problems

The Five Areas of Difficulty
in Managing Daily Activities
It’s easier to see how thoroughly poor inhibition, poor self-control, and executive
function problems can invade your life if you look at the difficulties that they
cause in the following five major areas. Quickly check off which of these problems
you’ve experienced to get an idea of all the ways ADHD affects you.

Know Your AdHd 49
Problem Area 1: Poor Self-Management Relative to Time,
Planning, and Goals
☐ Procrastinate or put off doing things until the last minute
☐ Poor sense of time
☐ Waste or mismanage my time
☐ Not prepared for work or assigned tasks
☐ Fail to meet deadlines for assignments
☐ Have trouble planning ahead or preparing for upcoming events
☐ Forget to do things I am supposed to do
☐ Can’t seem to accomplish the goals I set for myself
☐ Late for work or scheduled appointments
☐ Can’t seem to hold in mind things I need to remember to do
☐ Have difficulty keeping in mind the purpose or goal of my activities
☐ Find it difficult to keep track of several activities at once
☐ Can’t seem to get things done unless there is an immediate deadline
☐ Have difficulty judging how much time it will take to do something or get
somewhere
☐ Have trouble motivating myself to start work
☐ Have difficulty motivating myself to stick with my work and get it done
☐ Not motivated to prepare in advance for things I know I am supposed to
do
☐ Have trouble completing one activity before starting a new one
☐ Have trouble doing what I tell myself to do
☐ Poor follow-through on promises or commitments I may make to others
☐ Lack self-discipline
☐ Have difficulty arranging or doing my work by its priority or importance;
can’t “prioritize” well
☐ Find it hard to get started or get going on things I need to get done

50 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
If you’ve struggled with a significant number of these problems, it should be
pretty clear to you that ADHD in adults is a problem with the ability to organize
behavior over time to prepare for the future.
Problem Area 2: Poor Self-Organization, Problem Solving,
and Working Memory
☐ Cannot focus my attention on tasks or work as well as others
☐ Have difficulties with mental arithmetic
☐ Can’t seem to remember what I previously heard or read about
☐ Trouble organizing my thoughts or thinking clearly
☐ Forget the point I was trying to make when talking to others
☐ When shown something complicated to do, cannot keep the information
in mind so as to imitate or do it correctly
☐ Dislike work or school activities where I must think more than usual
☐ Do not seem to anticipate the future as much as or as well as others
☐ Have difficulties saying what I want to say
☐ Unable to come up with or invent as many solutions to problems as others
seem to do
☐ Often at a loss for words when I want to explain something to others
☐ Have trouble putting my thoughts down in writing as well or as quickly
as others
How many of these problems (you may hear people on your
treatment team call these “deficits”) do you recognize in yourself?
Do any examples from your own life come to mind?

☐ Often at a loss for words when I want to explain something to others
☐ Have trouble putting my thoughts down in writing as well or as quickly
as others
How many of these problems (you may hear people on your
treatment team call these “deficits”) do you recognize in yourself?
Do any examples from your own life come to mind?

Know Your AdHd 51
☐ Can’t comprehend what I read as well as I should be able to; have to reread
material to get its meaning
☐ Feel I am not as creative or inventive as others of my intelligence
☐ In trying to accomplish goals or assignments, find I am not able to think
of as many ways of doing things as others
☐ Have trouble learning new or complex activities as well as others
☐ Have difficulty explaining things in their proper order or sequence
☐ Can’t seem to get to the point of my explanations as quickly as others
☐ Have trouble doing things in their proper order or sequence
☐ Unable to “think on my feet” or respond as effectively as others to unex-
pected events
☐ Easily distracted by irrelevant events or thoughts when I must concentrate
on something
☐ Slower to react to unexpected events
☐ Can’t seem to remember things I have done or places I have been as well
as others seem to do
You may know from personal experience that adults with ADHD have signif-
icant problems with organizing their thoughts and actions, doing so quickly and
effectively, and thinking up multiple possible ways of doing things or overcoming
obstacles they encounter in pursuing their goals or assigned tasks in daily life.
Is this list all too familiar? Which problems struck a strong chord
with you?

52 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
Problem Area 3: Poor Self-Restraint (Inhibition)
☐ Find it difficult to tolerate waiting; impatient
☐ Make decisions impulsively
☐ Unable to inhibit my reactions or responses to events or others
☐ Have difficulty stopping my activities or behavior when I should do so
☐ Have difficulty changing my behavior when I am given feedback about
my mistakes
☐ Make impulsive comments to others
☐ Likely to do things without considering the consequences
☐ Change my plans at the last minute on a whim or sudden impulse
☐ Fail to consider past relevant events or past personal experiences before
responding to situations
☐ Do not think about the future as much as others my age seem to do
☐ Not aware of things I say or do
☐ Have difficulty being objective about things that affect me
☐ Find it hard to see a problem or situation from someone else’s perspective
☐ Quick to get angry or become upset
☐ Don’t seem to worry about future events as much as others
☐ Don’t think about or talk things over with myself before doing something
☐ Have difficulty using sound judgment in problem situations or when under
stress
☐ Trouble following the rules in a situation
☐ Not very flexible in my behavior or approach to a situation; overly rigid in
how I like things done
☐ More likely to engage in risk-taking behavior than others
☐ More likely to drive a motor vehicle much faster than others (excessive
speeding)

☐ Have difficulty using sound judgment in problem situations or when under
stress
☐ Trouble following the rules in a situation
☐ Not very flexible in my behavior or approach to a situation; overly rigid in
how I like things done
☐ More likely to engage in risk-taking behavior than others
☐ More likely to drive a motor vehicle much faster than others (excessive
speeding)

Know Your AdHd 53
Notice that these problems with inhibition apply not just to behavior but also
to thinking and emotions. This is why poor inhibition and limited self-regulation
cut such a broad swath through your life: If you can’t stop your own actions,
thoughts, and emotions to give time and self-control a chance to get any traction,
you won’t be guided to decisions that would be better for your long-term welfare.
Problem Area 4: PoorSelf-Motivation
☐ Likely to take shortcuts in my work and not do all that I am supposed to do
☐ Likely to skip out on work early if it’s boring or hard to do
☐ Can’t seem to defer gratification or to put off doing things that are reward-
ing now so as to work for a later goal
☐ Give poor attention to details in my work
☐ Do not put as much effort into my work as I should or as others are able
to do
☐ Told by others that I am lazy or unmotivated
☐ Have to depend on others to help me get my work done
☐ Do not seem to get things done unless they have an immediate payoff for
me
☐ Have difficulty resisting the urge to do something fun or more interesting
when I am supposed to be working
☐ Inconsistent in the quality or quantity of my work performance
☐ Unable to work as well as others without supervision or frequent instruc-
tion
Which of these problems are ones you struggle with? Can you
think of a time when you’ve had to deal with these recently?

54 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
☐ Do not have the willpower or determination that others seem to have
☐ Things must have an immediate payoff for me or I do not seem to get them
done
I suspect you know how tough it can be to persist when what you have to do
is boring, takes a lot of effort, or is prolonged. If you can’t motivate yourself, how
can you persist? ADHD leaves you depending on immediate rewards or threats of
consequences imposed by others.
Problem Area 5: Poor Emotional Self-Regulation
☐ Quick to get angry or become upset
☐ Overreact emotionally
☐ Easily excitable
☐ Unable to inhibit expression of strong negative or positive emotions
☐ Have trouble calming myself down once I am emotionally upset
☐ Cannot seem to regain emotional control and become more reasonable
once I am emotional
☐ Cannot seem to distract myself from whatever is upsetting me to help calm
myself down; can’t refocus to get into a more positive frame of mind.
☐ Unable to manage my emotions to accomplish my goals successfully or get
along well with others
☐ Remain emotional or upset longer than others
Which items on this list are familiar to you? In what types of
situations?

☐ Cannot seem to distract myself from whatever is upsetting me to help calm
myself down; can’t refocus to get into a more positive frame of mind.
☐ Unable to manage my emotions to accomplish my goals successfully or get
along well with others
☐ Remain emotional or upset longer than others
Which items on this list are familiar to you? In what types of
situations?

Know Your AdHd 55
☐ Find it difficult to walk away from emotionally upsetting encounters with
others or leave situations in which I have become very emotional
☐ Cannot rechannel or redirect my emotions into more positive outlets
when upset
Adults with ADHD find it very hard to inhibit strong emotional reactions
and then down-regulate them so they are more acceptable to others and more sup-
portive of longer-term goals and welfare.
Which of the preceding problems affect you? How, in particular?
My recent studies have shown that 89–98% of adults with ADHD report hav-
ing major problems in the five problem areas listed on the previous pages,
compared to just 7–11% of typical adults in the general population:
Adults with
ADHD (%)
Adults in
the general
community (%)
Self-reports
Time management problems 
98 8
Poor mental organization 
89 11
Inhibition problems 
94 7
Self-motivation problems 
95 9
Emotional control problems 
98 7

56 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
These five problem areas created by ADHD in major adult life activities obvi-
ously pervade nearly everything you have to do on a daily basis. That they can
severely interfere with your education and your functioning in your work ought
to be very clear. But it’s probably glaringly obvious to you how they have been
interfering as well with your social relationships, including dating, marriage, or
living with a partner. If you’ve been having problems with managing money, driv-
ing, or raising your children, you may now see how those abilities can be disrupted
by ADHD. No doubt you can even see how these problems might deter you from
taking preventive health measures and adopting a lifestyle that promotes your
overall long-term welfare. These connections point to an inescapable conclusion:
ADHD in Adults Is Not Merely a Trivial Disorder
of Attention!
Instead it’s a problem with the ability to organize behavior over time to prepare for
the future. The five problem areas in ADHD add up to an exceptional disorder
of self-regulation that results in a veritable nearsightedness about
the future. And that, as you probably know firsthand, is a recipe for
disaster in most major life activities.
What you will learn in the next three steps that can help you tre-
mendously is this:
ADHD is a form
of
time blindness.
Adults with
ADHD (%)
Adults in
the general
community (%)
Reports of others who know the adult well
Time management problems 
96 9
Poor mental organization 
84 7
Inhibition problems 
94 11
Self-motivation problems 
84 9
Emotional control problems 
99 14

mendously is this:
ADHD is a form
of
time blindness.
Adults with
ADHD (%)
Adults in
the general
community (%)
Reports of others who know the adult well
Time management problems 
96 9
Poor mental organization 
84 7
Inhibition problems 
94 11
Self-motivation problems 
84 9
Emotional control problems 
99 14

Know Your AdHd 57
Hold on to that thought. It’s important not just to your understanding of
ADHD but to your confidence that you can improve your life—that you are not
stupid, lazy, or “just not paying attention.” You know what to do. Let’s see how you
can learn to use what you know when you need it.
Knowledge
Performance
ADHD
The Brain as a Knowledge versus Performance Device
The problems that ADHD creates are not so much with knowledge, or the
back part of our brain, but with performance, or the front part of our brain.
That is where we use that knowledge in daily life for greater effectiveness.
Thus, the problems for you have more to do with not using what you know
at critical points of performance in your life than with not knowing what to do.

58
7
Resisting Impulses
The First Step in Self-Control
“Why am I so easily distracted when I’m trying hard to concentrate?”
“I know I was supposed to get that project done this morning, but I just couldn’t
seem to tear myself away from this great video soccer game I was playing with guys
all over the United States. Now I am really in hot water at work. If I find some-
thing exciting, fun, or just plain interesting, I get completely stuck.”
“I can’t tell you how many times I have shot my mouth off without thinking and
wound up offending someone, or purchased things I thought I really wanted even
though I didn’t have the funds to pay them off on my credit card, or just up and
quit a job because I was bored with what I was asked to do that day.”
We all need to stop and think before we act. And stop is the key word here.
Thinking before we act so we can choose a wise course of action starts with the
ability to wait. If we immediately responded to everything that happened around
us, we’d spend our days like human pinballs. Not responding to events that hap-
pen around us is critical to getting tasks done. That’s because most of the things
around us are irrelevant to the goals we are pursuing at the moment. Inhibition is
the foundation of tact. It helps create a pause in our automatic actions so we can
think about the situation and thus make good decisions—and become better and
better decision makers over time.
Dragged Away by Distractions
Here’s a short list of activities that 30-year-old Dan said he found difficult if not
impossible:

Resisting Impulses 59
✓ Reading
✓ Doing paperwork
✓ Attending a college lecture
✓ Watching TV
✓ Watching a movie
✓ Having long conversations
Dan found reading more than a paragraph at a time almost impossible
because there was “always something going on around me that distracted me,
whether it was a bird chirping outside the window, one of my kids walking through
the room, or some tangent that my mind went off on when I read a sentence that
reminded me of something else.” Doing paperwork was even more painful: “I can’t
seem to concentrate on such boring stuff for very long.” Lectures? They were “the
worst, because I couldn’t leave the class when I got bored, but I couldn’t keep my
attention on what the teacher was saying for very long either.” Dan could watch a
TV show that he really liked but still found himself “channel surfing across a lot

seem to concentrate on such boring stuff for very long.” Lectures? They were “the
worst, because I couldn’t leave the class when I got bored, but I couldn’t keep my
attention on what the teacher was saying for very long either.” Dan could watch a
TV show that he really liked but still found himself “channel surfing across a lot
of different programs, especially during the commercials.” Dan’s wife liked to sit
and talk about her day after work, but Dan said he always had to be doing some-
thing physical, moving all the time or just being busy. She, of course, took that as
a sign that he wasn’t paying attention to her needs and so didn’t care about her.
“Inside,” he explained, “I feel so restless even if I’m not actually moving much. I
just have this urge to be busy, or touching stuff, or playing with anything around
me. It drives my wife nuts.”
For most of his life Dan has been told he doesn’t “pay attention.” That never
made much sense to him. He doesn’t purposely drift off or just space out. Key to
understanding ADHD is that many problems labeled simply as “difficulty paying
Do you identify with Dan’s list? What would you add to it?

60 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
attention” are actually problems with impulse control. It’s not just that Dan and
other adults with ADHD cannot sustain attention. It’s also that they can’t resist
the impulse to pay attention to something else that enters their field of vision . . .
or hearing . . . or thinking . . . whenever it enters that field if it is more interest-
ing than what they should be concentrating on at the time. The problem isn’t not
knowing what to do (pay attention), but not doing what you know at the right time—
which is to STOP before going off on a tangent or reacting to those distracting
but irrelevant events.
Poor inhibition is a problem that develops very early in life in most cases and
remains a problem for adults with ADHD across their entire life. Parents, friends,
and coworkers have probably been baffled by your inability to block out distract-
ing sights, sounds, and movements for as long as you can remember. They can
zero in on the task at hand; why can’t you? Do you perceive peripheral noises and
sights better than other people? Are you more sensitive to everything that’s going
on around you? No. People without ADHD can stop themselves from responding
to distractions; they do it so automatically that they’re not even aware of having
made an effort to do so. You, on the other hand, lack that “brake” switch that
could keep your mind trained on the task that’s most important to you: the one
you need to get done right now.
Dan’s wife might be more forgiving of his hyperactivity if she knew that the
problem arises from poorly timed brain development in those with ADHD.
The primary motor system of the brain—the part that gives rise to various
and small motor movements—appears to mature too early in people with
ADHD. This leads to an excess of motor movements or restlessness. And
the higher-level brain center nearby, which governs that motor system and
organizes our behavior toward future goals, develops too late, as shown in
the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) study described on page 111.
This means that kids with ADHD have the neurological impulse to move
around constantly without the brakes that tell them not to. As development
proceeds, the fabulous learning machine called the human brain catches up

organizes our behavior toward future goals, develops too late, as shown in
the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) study described on page 111.
This means that kids with ADHD have the neurological impulse to move
around constantly without the brakes that tell them not to. As development
proceeds, the fabulous learning machine called the human brain catches up
a bit, and that’s why Dan doesn’t tumble around his living room as an adult.
But it never catches up to the capacity of those without ADHD, and that’s
why Dan still feels that restless urge to move or to do something all the time.
Dan’s problems also have a lot to do with sitting still. Impulse control is
highly related to the hyperactivity that is more common in kids than in adults.

Resisting Impulses 61
Notice that Dan says he feels restless inside all the time. He
may now be able to resist the impulse to do somersaults in the
living room while his wife is talking—an impulse he couldn’t
resist at age 10—but he does end up tapping his foot, fidgeting
with the kitchen utensils or knickknacks next to him, or feeling
so uncomfortably antsy that just trying to focus on his wife’s
voice makes him scowl with irritation. You can imagine how she interprets this
reaction from her husband.
Too Quick on the Trigger
Now look at 25-year-old Shayla’s list of “impossible” tasks:
✓ Waiting in line
✓ Staying silent when someone “can’t seem to get a move on”
✓ Waiting behind many cars to make a right turn at a stoplight
✓ Stopping herself once she’s started talking
Saying she “just can’t seem to wait for things,” Shayla has missed movies she
wants to see because she can’t stand in a long line. If several cars are in front of her
at a red light when she wants to make a right turn, she just drives over onto the
shoulder or the sidewalk right up to the light and makes her turn without waiting.
When stuck in traffic, she usually rides the horn a lot to try to get people moving
“even though I know it won’t usually work.”
Where Dan notices what he doesn’t get done due to distractions, Shayla’s
problems with inhibition are more about what she does do because she can’t put
on the mental brakes. Her driver’s license has already been suspended once due
to her risky driving habits. She has walked out on job after job, sometimes on the
very first day, because she couldn’t stand the boring parts of the work or anything
that involved waiting. In school she was constantly being sent to the principal’s
office for being a “motor mouth,” and as an adult she’s often labeled a “boor” or an
“egomaniac” because she can’t seem to resist monopolizing any conversation. As
a teen she couldn’t stand waiting till she’d saved enough money to buy the little
sports car she wanted. So one day Shayla “borrowed” one belonging to a friend
of her father’s. Fortunately, he refused to press charges when he reported it stolen
and the police stopped Shayla speeding along the highway in it. But things don’t
always end that well these days.
She has ended up in shouting matches with strangers and alienated friends
More on brain
development and
self-control in
Chapter 9.


of her father’s. Fortunately, he refused to press charges when he reported it stolen
and the police stopped Shayla speeding along the highway in it. But things don’t
always end that well these days.
She has ended up in shouting matches with strangers and alienated friends
More on brain
development and
self-control in
Chapter 9.


62 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
because she blurts out whatever comes to mind. People describe her as hotheaded,
tactless, and just plain “clueless” or “stupid.” The truth is that emotional and intel-
lectual problems also come into play in Shayla’s unfortunate behavior choices (see
Chapter 9), but the trouble starts when Shayla doesn’t adequately contemplate or
deliberate about her possible actions and their future consequences, valuing more
the near-term excitement and smaller, more immediate rewards over the less excit-
ing and more punitive future consequences likely to occur with that choice.
One-Track Mind
The same underlying problem that makes it hard for you to sit still and concen-
trate or to think before acting can, believe it or not, also make it difficult to stop
what you’re doing. All through school, people thought Jess just couldn’t learn. He
seemed to make the same mistakes over and over. He would stick doggedly with
an effort that everyone around him could see was fruitless. Once he broke off a
key in the door of his girlfriend’s garage because when it didn’t unlock the door
he just kept twisting it until it broke. As an adult, he bent a corkscrew beyond
recognition because he didn’t notice as he tried to open a wine bottle that the
metal wasn’t a foil covering on top of a cork but a metal cap in the cork’s place.
His neighbor once called the fire department when Jess let his backyard grill set a
shrub on fire because he was so immersed in mapping out a vegetable garden that
he got distracted while grilling.
When most people make a mistake in the middle of a project—an ingredi-
ent added to a dish doesn’t have the effect the recipe said it would, or the paint is
almost gone with only half the garage done—they tend to slow down and think
for a moment about the mistake and whether it means anything important. Mis-
takes often give us information about how we could be doing something better or
whether we should stop doing this activity altogether, at least for that moment.
Adults with ADHD do not seem to monitor their performance of tasks as well
as others, or to use mistakes they make to give them important information that
Do you identify with Shayla’s list? What would you add to it?

Resisting Impulses 63
could guide their actions in the immediate future. It’s as if they start on a straight
line and stay on it relentlessly no matter the mistakes that may be piling up behind
them.
If what they are doing is particularly fun, rewarding, or interesting, many
adults with ADHD may also find it hard to stop even when they’re not making
mistakes but need to get on with another task that needs to be done soon but is
far less interesting. While some advocates for adults with ADHD call this “hyper-
focusing,” researchers call this problem perseveration. Perseveration often looks
like procrastination. But as you might know, it’s not that the person has decided
to put off something that isn’t fun. It’s that he or she decided to keep going on
something that is fun.
Poor inhibition can make doing
any task feel like taking one step for-

focusing,” researchers call this problem perseveration. Perseveration often looks
like procrastination. But as you might know, it’s not that the person has decided
to put off something that isn’t fun. It’s that he or she decided to keep going on
something that is fun.
Poor inhibition can make doing
any task feel like taking one step for-
ward and two steps back, over and over.
It can also make a poor impression on
those whom you want to think favor-
ably about you. Knowing this deficit is
behind problems you may be having that are like those of
Dan, Shayla, and Jess can help you stop beating yourself
up. This knowledge can also lead you straight to ways to
compensate that can make a world of difference.
Do you identify with Jess’s experience? Can you think of similar
problems you’ve had?
Improving impulse
control starts with
changing your brain:
See Step Three.
Compensating is all
about buying yourself
time: See Step Four.

The “time blindness”
of ADHD starts with a
lack of impulse control.

64
8
Self-Control
How to Get What You Want
“I have no self-discipline! I have goals, but I never get them done. When things get
even the least bit difficult or I run into a problem, I just give up.”
“My life is nearly half over, and I haven’t been able to accomplish most of the goals
I’ve set for myself. I’m as bright as most of the people I know. Sometimes I wonder if
I’m just lazy or don’t care as much as others about getting important things done.”
“One time a friend and I were working this construction job, and he said he was
going to quit that day and drive from Wisconsin to Denver and just look for a new
job out there. He had never been there but had heard it was a cool place to live. So
I said I’d go with him, just like that. No plans, no job prospects, no place to live—
nothing! And we both walked out and started driving. I mean, how stupid is that?”
Lacking self-control robs you of free will. This is one of the most tragic con-
sequences of ADHD. You might think you’re doing what you desire. Yet if you
can’t inhibit your behavior, you miss out on the delay between an event and your
response. That delay is essential: It gives you the chance to think. Even more criti-
cally, that delay empowers you to choose freely among all of your available options,
both now and in the future. Len, the guy who spontaneously took off for Denver
with a friend, might have felt pretty good—free and easy—when they set out. But
it didn’t take long for him to realize that ending up in an unfamiliar city with no
friends, no job, and no money was not what he wanted. Had he taken a moment
or two to think it over before acting, he probably wouldn’t have gone.
That’s what I mean by self-control: the ability to choose something other
than your initial impulse so you can get something in the future that you want
more or that is better for your long-term welfare and happiness.

friends, no job, and no money was not what he wanted. Had he taken a moment
or two to think it over before acting, he probably wouldn’t have gone.
That’s what I mean by self-control: the ability to choose something other
than your initial impulse so you can get something in the future that you want
more or that is better for your long-term welfare and happiness.

Self-Control 65
Self- control is defined in psychology as any response, or chain of responses,
that we direct at ourselves that leads us to change our own behavior instead
of just acting on impulse so that we can change what will happen in the
future. It is action directed at the self to change that likely future.
This capacity not to respond to events is much more highly developed in
humans than in any other species. A deer that smells smoke in the woods will
probably run away from the smell without thinking. A person who smells smoke
in the woods might pause to figure out whether it seems likely to be a forest fire, a
campfire, or a lantern and then act accordingly. “Free will” is just another way of
saying we have the capacity to deliberate on our options to act, which in turn gives
us the opportunity to choose what’s best for us down the road.
With self-control, we can direct our behavior toward the future in general,
and what may lie ahead for us specifically, rather than always engaging in knee-
jerk actions that might get us nowhere (or might get us to Denver, where we have
no future). We can get ready for the tomorrows, the next weeks, the next months,
and even the next years in life. We can organize ourselves
with an eye on that future.
And in that future, there are many prizes to be had.
There are also all those hazards that can be avoided when
we can anticipate them and plan well for them. Without
self-control, we wind up in places we didn’t really want to
be, feeling stupid, guilty, or demoralized, lazy or apathetic,
not to mention rudderless—and may even end up injured
or dead due to reckless risk taking.
The Six Key Processes Involved in Self-Control
You may view self-control as a pretty loaded term. How many times since you were
a child have you heard the command “Control yourself!”? How many times did
you think to yourself that you would if you only had some idea how? Understand-
ing how self-control works will defuse the term. You’ll also see that self-control is
a process with little entry points where using a strategy or tool can free your will
so you can get what you want out of life—not just this minute but in the future
stretching out before you.
These are the six key components involved in self-control:
Step Four contains
a series of “rules” that
you can apply to trick
your brain into exerting
self-
control where it
doesn’t normally.


66 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
1. 
Self-control is a self-directed action. This means instead of acting in
direct response toward an event, you stop and take action toward yourself. When
his friend said he was going to Denver, if Len did not have ADHD, he probably would
have inhibited the “Wow, that sounds great to me too!” response long enough to think
about what uprooting himself might actually mean over the longer term. Maybe he
would then have made a list of the issues that needed to be considered in such a relo-
cation (such as a job, housing, transportation). Engaging in self-restraint (pausing) is
a self-directed action, and so is writing yourself notes to contemplate and break down

about what uprooting himself might actually mean over the longer term. Maybe he
would then have made a list of the issues that needed to be considered in such a relo-
cation (such as a job, housing, transportation). Engaging in self-restraint (pausing) is
a self-directed action, and so is writing yourself notes to contemplate and break down
complex decisions and things to be done.
2. 
These self-directed actions are designed to change your subsequent
behavior. There are seven such self-directed actions (which are our executive
functions) that I will discuss later. Len might have decided to nod and say, “Good
luck!” Or he might have chosen to say, “Wow, that sounds great to me too, but maybe I
could come out after you tell me whether it’s panning out for you.” Or maybe he would
have opted not to take any action right now but have recognized a need to think about
it, make some notes to pursue more information on the important issues (job, housing,
transportation), and then consider taking action in the future: If moving sounded good
but going to Denver right now wouldn’t work for a variety of reasons, perhaps Len
should start thinking about where else he might want to relocate in the future. Notice
that the initial pause and even making a “do list” of issues are self-directed actions that
lead to a change in what Len is likely to do next.
3. 
This change in subsequent behavior is designed to achieve a net gain
(maximization) of positive outcomes across both the short and long term for
the individual. The behavior is directed at the future but will
also take the immediate consequences into account to come up
with the best bottom line. Len might have to give up the positive
consequence of going on an exciting road trip to get a greater positive
outcome later, such as moving to Denver, but only after he had
found a job out there. All of Len’s self-directed actions lead to a
greater likelihood that the decision to relocate or not will be more in
line with his longer-term welfare. With self-control, we sacrifice
the bird in the hand for the more profitable two in the bush. Unless, of course, we
have adult ADHD, in which case we will keep opting for the bird in the hand and
never work our way toward a flock.
4. 
Self-control depends on a preference for larger delayed rewards over
smaller, immediate ones. If you can’t conceive of the future or you don’t value
later consequences, there’s no point to self-control and you won’t use it. If Len
didn’t have ADHD, he might not have to think for more than a second about what
he’d rather do—run off to Denver today or plan for a move someplace new over the
If it didn’t result in
a net positive, why
would anyone exercise
self-control?

Self-Control 67
next year. He’d immediately know that realizing the dream of having a good job and an
affordable home in a beautiful new location was more valuable to him than the fleeting
fun of taking off on a road trip with a friend without a plan, just to get there right
away.
5. 
Self-control bridges the time lapse between an event, our response,
and an outcome. We may not need self-control at all when the gap between
event, response, and outcome is small or nil. Imagine your
5-year-old daughter spotting the ice cream truck coming toward
her. She asks you for an ice cream, the truck stops, you buy one
and hand it to her. She’s completely calm through the short
sequence of events. Now imagine that your daughter hears the

event, response, and outcome is small or nil. Imagine your
5-year-old daughter spotting the ice cream truck coming toward
her. She asks you for an ice cream, the truck stops, you buy one
and hand it to her. She’s completely calm through the short
sequence of events. Now imagine that your daughter hears the
ice cream truck but can’t see it. She has to contain her excite-
ment while she figures out whether the truck is coming toward
her and how far away it is. By the time it comes into her field of
vision she covets that ice cream as if she hasn’t had one for
years. She jumps up and down and squeals with excitement as
she pleads, “Daddy, Daddy, there it is—can I have an ice
cream?” Whereupon you say, “Well, an ice cream will spoil your dinner. How
about if we buy one and put it in the freezer for later?” It now takes every ounce of
self-control a 5-year-old can muster to inhibit the impulse to kick you in the shins.
For a 5-year-old in this situation, self-control may involve mainly controlling emo-
tions. For an adult trying to keep working toward saving for a house when there
are dozens of opportunities every day to spend that money
right then and there instead, all kinds of abilities are
required to exert self-control.
When the time between event, response, and outcome
is long, self-control helps us manage ourselves relative to
time and the future. It helps us bind these events discon-
nected in time into a cohesive idea that we can take with us
to keep our eye on the prize.
The abilities
we need to exert
self-
control are
called
executive
functions,
and
they’re discussed
in Chapter 9.

“Carpe diem”—seize the
day—could be the motto
of all adults with ADHD.
It’s great on vacation; it’s
terrible as a daily rule.
Psychologists have found that our preference for larger, delayed conse-
quences increases from childhood all the way up to our early 30s, paralleling
the development of the frontal lobes of the brain—the seat of our self- control.
But ADHD derails that development and leaves even adults picking the smaller
immediate outcomes, instead of the larger delayed ones.

68 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
Researchers refer to bridging the gap between event, response, and out-
come over long time spans as a capacity for the cross-temporal organiza-
tion of behavioral contingencies. It is job one of your executive brain (frontal
lobes). That’s a mouthful. Think of it as the ability to engage in time manage-
ment or, more aptly, to manage yourself relative to the passage of time.
As 
an adult with ADHD, Len will have a hard time working toward that reloca-
tion goal. With the outcome so far off, he’s likely to forget about the whole plan and do
little or nothing to prepare. He might set a date for moving but
be just as unprepared for it when the time comes as he was
when taking off on a whim with his friend. Self-control in this
case would mean he’d have to push himself to research regions
of the United States, spend time every week on job searches in
the chosen area, find out how much income he’d need to afford
the kind of home he wants, and more—all before reaping the
benefits of the move.
6. 
For self-control to occur, we need the capacity for
both hindsight and foresight. How do we bind the events,
responses, and outcomes of life together when there are
large gaps in time between them? We have to have a fundamental sense of time—
that there is a past, a present, and a future—and be able to conjecture about the

For self-control to occur, we need the capacity for
both hindsight and foresight. How do we bind the events,
responses, and outcomes of life together when there are
large gaps in time between them? We have to have a fundamental sense of time—
that there is a past, a present, and a future—and be able to conjecture about the
future. To speculate about the future, we have to be able to recall our past and
evaluate it to detect possible patterns. This recall of the past, or hindsight, gives us
the ability to think about possible futures that are based on those past events, or
foresight. It would prevent Len from taking off for another locale without prepara-
tion, as he had when he left for Denver.
What you might have thought of as self-control as
a child—sitting still when told to, being quiet in class
when you really wanted to tell your friend something,
eating only one doughnut instead of the whole box—
has far greater ramifications in adult life. Paradoxi-
cally, without self-control you can’t be free. Let’s take
a look at the abilities that make up self-control next.
Hindsight and
foresight rely on
nonverbal working
memory,
a mental
faculty in short supply
in adults with ADHD, as
discussed in Chapter 9.

Poor inhibition leads to poor
self-control and robs you of
your free will—the capacity to
choose wisely among possible
options for responding to
events or to your own thoughts.

69
9
Executive Functions
The Seven Abilities That Make Up
Self-Control . . . and More
“Why does it take me 2 hours to write a business letter that other people can write
in 10 minutes? I can’t seem to get my ideas to flow in this nice orderly sequence to
write down what I want to say.”
“I have a terrible time controlling my emotions, especially if something happens that
frustrates or upsets me. One of the many times I locked my keys in my car and
really had to get somewhere important for my job, I got so angry at myself that I
started to tear the door off the car. People driving by must have been staring at me
and thinking ‘That guy is really crazy!’ but I didn’t care.”
✓ Chapter 7 showed that we use inhibition to delay the decision to respond
to an event—to wait.
✓ Chapter 8 showed that this delay gives us time to engage in self-control.
Self-control, or better yet, self-regulation, allows us to monitor our own
actions, stop ourselves as needed, contemplate our possible actions, and
then choose the wisest course of action to get the best possible outcome
in the future.
✓ But how do we control ourselves? What allows us to use the time created
by resisting an impulse wisely? That’s the subject of Chapter 9.
Scientists in the field of neuropsychology call the capacities behind self-
control the executive functions, or sometimes executive abilities. They’re the
actions directed at ourselves, the mental activities we engage in when we think
about our future and what we should be doing to get there and to make it better.
Different scientists have conceptualized executive functions differently, but
what you’ll read here is the view I’ve developed. (It is, after all, my book.)

actions directed at ourselves, the mental activities we engage in when we think
about our future and what we should be doing to get there and to make it better.
Different scientists have conceptualized executive functions differently, but
what you’ll read here is the view I’ve developed. (It is, after all, my book.)

70 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
Research now suggests that there are at least six other executive functions
besides inhibition—a total of seven different actions we use to monitor our own
behavior, stop ourselves, think things over, and guide our eventual behavior while
controlling our emotions and motivations to optimize our success at attaining our
goals. We use these actions for the single purpose of controlling our own behavior
to achieve a better future:
✓ Self-awareness
✓ Inhibition
✓ Nonverbal working memory
✓ Verbal working memory
✓ Emotion regulation
✓ Self-motivation
✓ Planning/problem solving
Here’s how they develop:
✓ Executive functions are more obvious in children and more internalized in
adults. We’re hardly aware of these mental machinations. No one can really see us
engaging in them. They’re the things we adults “do in our heads” all day long as
we choose what to do in every situation. They are what most of us refer to simply
as “thinking.” Yet I believe all seven are entirely obvious, public behavior early in
child development. Executive functions were likely also public or obvious early
in human evolution, when the human brain was much more primitive, but that’s
a story for my other book on executive functions. As we mature, we internalize
them, like the species probably did as it evolved.
Think of it this way: People develop an ability to engage in some action to
themselves, like talking out loud to themselves to control their actions. Eventu-
ally, these are no longer observable and occur just in the brain, like having an
idea. We say these actions are now “internalized,” as we are able to inhibit those
signals from leaving the brain, entering the spinal cord, and activating the actual
behavior. You can now imagine doing something without then actually doing it
physically. We come to “privatize” this process, probably through a simple switch
deep in the brain that can prevent a thought from being activated via the spinal
cord as a behavior. This internalizing or privatizing process creates a private form
of action that we usually call “thinking.”
Notice that this process involves inhibition; the thought can go on, but the
action it might create is prevented from occurring. Now you know why people
with ADHD often act out their thoughts impulsively instead of keeping them
Knowing which of your executive
functions is the weakest will
help you understand which
type of self-control to target in
efforts to cope and compensate.

executive Functions 71
in their mind (brain) for further evaluation before finally implementing them. If
you are into high-tech gadgetry, you know about simulators. They let us do things
in a virtual world without really doing them in the real world. Well, that’s what
this process of privatizing our actions lets us do—we get to simulate our ideas
and plans before we actually implement them to see how they might play out and
get to learn from such mental simulations. If we couldn’t do that, we would likely
experience more mistakes, failures, and injuries, and a greater likelihood of death,
all of which are real risks for people with ADHD.

this process of privatizing our actions lets us do—we get to simulate our ideas
and plans before we actually implement them to see how they might play out and
get to learn from such mental simulations. If we couldn’t do that, we would likely
experience more mistakes, failures, and injuries, and a greater likelihood of death,
all of which are real risks for people with ADHD.
These familiar examples will illustrate what I mean:
• 
Six-year-old Lena puts her hand over her mouth when she wants to tell a
secret that her friends just told her not to. At age 16, she won’t need the
physical restraint; she’ll just visualize doing so in her mind and maybe use
internal self-talk to stop herself even if she really wants to tell.
• 
Eight-year-old Rico softly but audibly repeats to himself, “Stay inside the
lines” and “Don’t push too hard on the pencil” during classroom writing
assignments to keep himself focused on the teacher’s rules and reminders.
When he’s older, he’ll be able to use his “mind’s voice” to say such things
to himself so automatically that he may not even be aware that he’s issuing
his own silent reminders.
• 
Crissy and her classmates start out using their fingers, some beads, and
then a number line on their desk to carry out the steps to solve a math
problem. As they mature, they’ll be able to complete problems using men-
tal rather than manual manipulation. They can visualize manipulating the
beads or moving their hand along a number line without really doing that
in the real world.
Adults with ADHD report that they need to use tactics that fall in
between obvious, public self-reminders and the nearly automatic
mental reminders that other adults give themselves. One adult
said he locks his mouth with an invisible key to get himself to stop
talking. Do you use tricks like that to control your behavior?

72 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
✓ Executive functions operate together but can cause impairments sepa-
rately. Other scientists and I have divided executive functioning into seven sepa-
rate abilities to understand them better. But we humans don’t experience them
as separate, nor do we use them one at a time as adults. The executive functions
operate like the sections of a symphony orchestra, playing simultaneously to pro-
duce seamlessly beautiful music. It is the action of these executive functions in
concert that permits normal human self-control. When ADHD enters the picture,
so do deficits in executive functions. These deficits might occur more in one exec-
utive function than in the others, producing different types of behavior problems
with self-control in different adults with ADHD. This means there are really seven
executive functions or seven different types of self-control and so seven different kinds
of deficits in ADHD. Knowing which one is the biggest problem for you makes it
easier to choose external tools and strategies that can make up for those internal
deficits. Later in the chapter, you’ll have a chance to review the problems listed
under each executive function to get an idea of where your biggest problems lie.
✓ The seven executive functions develop one at a time, in sequence, each added
to the earlier ones to build a mental structure, like a Swiss Army knife, that gives us a
set of mind tools that facilitate our self-control. As each executive function develops
in a child, control over the child’s behavior gradually shifts in four important ways

✓ The seven executive functions develop one at a time, in sequence, each added
to the earlier ones to build a mental structure, like a Swiss Army knife, that gives us a
set of mind tools that facilitate our self-control. As each executive function develops
in a child, control over the child’s behavior gradually shifts in four important ways
that should ultimately add up to adult self-determination:
• 
From external to internal: We all start out as babies being controlled by
purely external events—a loud noise, a mother’s departure, a wet diaper,
or, much later, the commands and directives of our parents—and then we
become increasingly managed by internal forms of information, much of
which deals with the past and future (images, self-speech, motivation, and
so forth, which make up our hindsight and foresight).
• 
From others to the self: At first, we need to be controlled and managed
entirely by others (such as parents), gradually becoming able to better con-
trol ourselves.
• 
From the present to the future: When very young, the only thing that mat-
ters to us is what’s happening right now. Throughout childhood we become
increasingly aware of and directed toward future events. Think of how long
you’d expect a typical 3-year-old to think ahead and plan out her day com-
pared to how far in advance a 14-year-old should be able to do it (a day or
two) and then for what period a 36-year-old should be able to do so (6–12
weeks ahead).
• 
From instant gratification to deferred gratification: More and more as we
mature, we find the big prize at the end of the long haul to be worth

executive Functions 73
waiting and working for and so turn away from the small seductions and
rewards of the moment to work for those much bigger rewards.
Think of what people usually mean when they call adults “childish.” The
barbs usually start flying at adults who seem ruled by whatever is going on around
them, who need other adults to do their thinking for them, who don’t think ahead,
and who have no patience.
As an adult with ADHD, you’ve been subjected to delayed development of
each of the seven executive functions. You’re no child, but these lags make you
less effective than other adults and may make your peers treat you as if you were a
child. You can head off blame (including self-blame) and help yourself make these
shifts from child to adult functioning more fully if you know a little more about
how the condition disables each executive function.
Self-Awareness—Using theMind’sMirror
Even though I focused so heavily on inhibition above because it is so essential to
self-control, it is actually not the first executive function to develop. Self-awareness
is the first executive function to emerge in childhood. It goes hand in glove with
inhibition because neither one makes any sense without the other right alongside
it, which means they both likely develop together or at least very close in time.
The other five executive functions would be useless without these first two: If you
are unaware of how you are behaving, why would you and how could you stop
yourself from behaving the way you’re behaving? And if you don’t monitor your
behavior and change it as necessary, you’re also not likely to spend time thinking
about your past and future, how they can inform your decisions going forward, and
even what goals you want to achieve.
Sound at all familiar? Does an example from your own life come to

yourself from behaving the way you’re behaving? And if you don’t monitor your
behavior and change it as necessary, you’re also not likely to spend time thinking
about your past and future, how they can inform your decisions going forward, and
even what goals you want to achieve.
Sound at all familiar? Does an example from your own life come to
mind?

74 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
That is actually what the vast majority of other species of animals do on this
planet. They are stimulus-response creatures, reacting to the moment as events
overtake them and adjusting their behavior only after the fact as a result of the
consequences—if they survive them. But not us. For we humans know that sim-
ply reacting is not what is best for us if we want to optimize our long-term welfare,
quality of life, and even survival over our short-term actions and their immediate
rewards.
First We Need to Be Aware of Our Surroundings
After we are born, our first order of business in development is to start to attend to
our surroundings and then begin to orient our motor responses to the things that
we detect are happening to us. We then start to adjust our next response based on
the actual consequences of what we do. All animal species do this, because if they
don’t, they won’t survive for very long as adults.
Then We Need to Be Aware of Ourselves
But very soon after developing such outer-directed attention and behavior, human
children turn that process of attention to themselves. After all, they and their
behavior are also part of the world they inhabit, and so it makes sense that they
should begin to become self-aware. As this ability emerges, we, unlike the vast
majority of other creatures, can see our reflection in a mirror and recognize our-
selves. This mirror test is precisely what is used by scientists to determine if a spe-
cies is self-aware and also when in human infancy this awareness starts to develop.
One likely reason we develop self-awareness and other creatures don’t is that
we are one of a rare handful of species that survive by living in groups with others,
some of whom are kin but others of whom are not! You probably don’t realize just
how very special living in that niche is. Most other social creatures don’t live with
beings they are not genetically related to, but we, chimps, dolphins, and a very
few other animals do. To do so requires some sort of frontal-lobe executive system
for tracking them and monitoring how we reciprocate with them as well as how
they reciprocate with us. Working memory, to be discussed later, is well suited for
doing just this.
In the niche of rare social species that live with non-kin, it becomes impor-
tant to monitor what you do, how others react to it, and whether they repay the
favor. We then adjust our behavior accordingly so that we can alter what we do
before we do it. We routinely depend on others, including non-kin within our
tribe, for our survival. But we don’t naively trust everyone, because non-kin do not
always have our best interests at heart the way biological family members usually
do. Thus how we control ourselves—to improve our social interactions, networks,

before we do it. We routinely depend on others, including non-kin within our
tribe, for our survival. But we don’t naively trust everyone, because non-kin do not
always have our best interests at heart the way biological family members usually
do. Thus how we control ourselves—to improve our social interactions, networks,

executive Functions 75
and welfare, sharing with the trustworthy reciprocators while quickly detecting
and avoiding the cheaters and exploiters—gives us a competitive advantage over
others (and other species) that are not doing so.
What Does This Mean for People with ADHD?
Regardless of its initial evolutionary function, self-awareness is so crucial to human
survival and social success that we frequently take it for granted. But when a dis-
order like ADHD undermines this basic executive function of self-awareness, it
can undermine the entire system of self-regulation and its purpose. A deficit in
that executive function means you have less awareness of how you’re acting, how
your behavior is coming across to others around you, and what the predictable
consequences would be for acting that way. You have more difficulty directing
your attention to yourself than others do. This may lead you to barge into social
situations or be offensive without realizing it, and not to notice how others around
you are reacting. Both adults and children with ADHD are often less aware than
others of how loudly they’re talking, how much they’re talking, what they’re trying
to say, how much they’re moving while saying it, why they’re even saying it (ram-
bling and forgetting their goals), and especially how others are reacting to what
they’re saying. Three of the ADHD symptoms in the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria in
the Appendix (and the only ones representing impulsiveness) illustrate precisely
this problem of verbal heedlessness.
Now extend this poor self-monitoring to other types of behavior and espe-
cially social interactions besides verbal ones and you can see the myriad social
problems this limited self-awareness can create for you. Compound this deficit
further by the fact that you might not realize how emotional you’re becoming dur-
ing some social exchanges, and you can see how your social life can go off the rails
very quickly. Unfortunately, those with whom you’re interacting don’t necessarily
know you have ADHD—or understand its role in causing your behavior—and
may see you as immature, self-centered, or egotistical. They don’t understand that
you can’t stop yourself if you can’t monitor what you’re doing and how it is playing
out with others.
This poses a sizable problem for both loved ones who can see what you cannot
see—that your behavior may at times be inappropriate and that others are judging
you negatively for it—and professionals who deal with adults with ADHD: How
can they help someone who doesn’t know he has a problem or doesn’t think it’s
significant enough to be addressed? It is for this very reason that a new require-
ment was added to the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria: Now clinicians must corrobo-
rate the reports of what the patient is saying with others who know the patient
well or, if not available, with archival school and other records that may reflect
how impaired the patient’s functioning is. Until age 30 or older, even adults with

ment was added to the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria: Now clinicians must corrobo-
rate the reports of what the patient is saying with others who know the patient
well or, if not available, with archival school and other records that may reflect
how impaired the patient’s functioning is. Until age 30 or older, even adults with

76 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
ADHD cannot be trusted to be the sole judge of their own behavior, symptoms, or
impairments; they simply do not have the necessary self-awareness to make accu-
rate self-assessments. You may feel belittled by a helping professional who gathers
information from others on your behavior rather than trusting your own reports.
Try to understand that the professional is following guidelines that will help diag-
nose your problems and lead to treatment. The deficit in self-awareness can obvi-
ously cause you a lot of problems. It may delay your recognition or acceptance of
the fact that you have a disorder—and in turn delay your seeking or receiving the
help you need and deserve. It doesn’t have to be that way.
Nonverbal Working Memory: Using the Mind’s Eye
Nonverbal working memory is the third executive function to develop, just shortly
after your ability to monitor your own actions and then to inhibit the immediate
urges to act. It’s the capacity to hold information in mind—not through words but
through your senses. So this executive function allows you to hold in your head
pictures, sounds, tastes, touches, and scents. Because vision is our most impor-
tant sense for survival, nonverbal working memory largely represents the ability to
engage in visual imagery—to “see to yourself” in your mind’s eye. A close second
in importance is hearing, so we can also “hear to ourselves” using nonverbal work-
ing memory. More accurately, we resee past events and rehear past sounds and the
things others have said to us. But we can also resense all of our other senses if we
need to, such as smell (when I recall the aroma of a good wine or scent of a favorite
flower), or taste (as when I recall or retaste my favorite lamb or salmon dish), or
even refeel the soft texture of my favorite flannel shirt on my neck and arms. It’s
all resensing in our mind as we recall these past sensations. So while I focus here
on visualizing and rehearing things in our mind, don’t forget we can do that with
our other senses too.
How Nonverbal Working Memory Guides Us
1. 
We get a map that leads us to the future we want. Seeing to ourselves
means reseeing past relevant events. What we’ve seen sometime in the past we
can see again in our head, thanks to this executive function. What we’ve heard
before we can hear again, also in our head. Resensing past experience, which con-
stitutes our “ideas,” creates an internal stream of information through our mind
that we can use to guide our behavior across time toward a goal. By envisioning
our past, we can foresee a possible future. It works just like the GPS in your car.
The device brings up a map of your region and allows you to use it to get to a

stitutes our “ideas,” creates an internal stream of information through our mind
that we can use to guide our behavior across time toward a goal. By envisioning
our past, we can foresee a possible future. It works just like the GPS in your car.
The device brings up a map of your region and allows you to use it to get to a

executive Functions 77
particular destination, which is your goal. Images of past relevant events are the
maps that we can use to guide us to our goal.
2. 
We gain the powerful tool called imitation. When you can hold an
image in your mind of what you have seen and experienced, especially if it involved
watching another person do something novel, you also now have the power to
imitate the behavior of others. Instead of having to go through the hard knocks of
trial-and-error learning in every new situation to come up with that new way of
doing something, you can call up your mental picture of how Dad or your best
friend handled a particular problem beautifully. And then you just copy that
image of what they did. No trial and error, no failure and frustration, and no harm
to ourselves. Imitation gives us a cheap and easy way to acquire new behavior
without learning it directly. We just “photocopy” what we saw someone else do.
How cool is that? It’s important to understand that when you learn through non-
verbal working memory, you don’t necessarily copy the other person’s actions liter-
ally but rather copy your image of those actions. The image is a template you can
use to copy what they did. Yet you always put your own spin on what you learn
from others. Nonverbal working memory also enables you to do the opposite of
what others have done rather than imitate them in everything they do, when what
you saw them do failed or resulted in errors, punishment, or harm. You just do the
opposite or do nothing at all and thus avoid whatever harms befell them. Imita-
tion, or more accurately vicarious learning, lets us take the best of what other
people have learned to do while avoiding the worst of their own mistakes, thus
making for a very efficient form of social learning that humans have elevated to
an art form during their evolution. Now imagine how inefficient and even harmful
learning will be if you don’t use nonverbal working memory very well if at all. We
see such problems in people with ADHD, who seem to benefit less than most
people from what they see others doing around them.
Nonverbal working memory allows not only imitation but the opposite: stay-
ing away from what someone else did that proved ineffective. This is called
vicarious learning.
3. 
We can foresee the consequences of our actions.
Chapter 8 explained that self-control depends on both hind-
sight and foresight: We need to be able to see in our mind’s
eye both our past experiences and any pattern that sheds
Hindsight → Foresight →
Preparation to act

ing away from what someone else did that proved ineffective. This is called
vicarious learning.
3. 
We can foresee the consequences of our actions.
Chapter 8 explained that self-control depends on both hind-
sight and foresight: We need to be able to see in our mind’s
eye both our past experiences and any pattern that sheds
Hindsight → Foresight →
Preparation to act

78 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
light on our likely future experiences. Hindsight brings your pertinent past his-
tory forward into the moment to inform you of the best way to behave given what
happened to you before. Foresight, or forethought, means taking any patterns per-
ceived in images from the past to anticipate what will happen in the future.
4. 
We gain self-awareness. We use our visual imagery to study our past, or
even just to hold our immediate past behavior in mind, so we can monitor our own
actions. Then we can compare them against what our plans, goals, and strategies
were and evaluate how well we are doing in performing that task or achieving our
goals. We gain a greater self-awareness of our life across time.
5. 
We’re capable of sensing the flow of time and thus managing our-
selves relative to it. The ability to hold a sequence of past events in our mind and
refer to them across time appears to give us a sense of time
itself, how it is flowing or progressing, and how best to man-
age our behavior relative to it. We understand how much
time may have passed, how much we have left, and what we
need to do when necessary to get tasks done on time. We
can judge how long something might take, such as driving
to work on a rainy morning, and thus plan our departure so
as to get to work on time. This capacity to sense and judge the flow of time and
manage ourselves relative to it, which we call time management, is one of the stron-
gest predictors of educational and occupational success.
6. 
We learn to defer gratification. To value a delayed consequence, you
must have a sense of the future and use it to guide your behavior. The more you
use that sense, the more likely you are to focus on the big rewards down the road
rather than the immediate, smaller prizes.
7. 
We can see further and further ahead. As hindsight and forethought
develop, we gain an expanding window on time (past, present, future) in our
conscious mind. It even gives us our subjective sense of time and its passing. Small
children can’t see much past a few minutes ahead. And they can’t judge time
intervals very well, much less use them to coordinate their actions. But by adult-
hood (ages 20–30), behavior is typically organized to deal with events 8–12 weeks
ahead, and our sense of the flow of time is almost continuously informing our
decisions and actions. And this time horizon can be extended further into the
future if the consequences associated with those events are particularly crucial
to us.
8. 
We value cooperation and sharing. The golden rule may not seem like
an obvious product of nonverbal working memory or visualizing to yourself. But
when you think about it, it makes perfect sense. With a grasp of the past, you
Nonverbal working memory
gives us a sense of time,
a key to time management.

We value cooperation and sharing. The golden rule may not seem like
an obvious product of nonverbal working memory or visualizing to yourself. But
when you think about it, it makes perfect sense. With a grasp of the past, you
Nonverbal working memory
gives us a sense of time,
a key to time management.

executive Functions 79
remember what others have done for you and you for them, and with your sense of
the future you realize that sharing and social cooperation insure you against pos-
sible shortfalls of resources. Therefore you’re willing to
give up and share some excess resources now with a less
fortunate friend or family member in the hope that the
recipient will share abundance with you later, when you
may need it. This voluntary and reciprocal form of altru-
ism is what makes social groups so effective in surviving
and competing against less cooperative individuals or
groups. Selective and voluntary sharing with like-minded people in our social
group is like an insurance policy against future misfortunes in life.
How ADHD Interferes with Nonverbal Working Memory
To get an idea of which type of self-control you might target when selecting strate-
gies from Steps Four and Five, think about which of the following are the biggest
problems for you.
✓ You have little or no feel for the passage of time, have trouble judging how much
time activities will take, and cannot manage yourself well relative to the passage of time.
When nonverbal working memory and its related sense of time are disturbed by
ADHD, it can leave an adult without a typical sense of time. All that seems to
matter to you is what is happening now. So you live much of your life in the now
rather than getting ready for what is going to happen next. It can also leave you
with a sense that time is passing much more slowly than it really is. This can make
you feel like you have a lot more time to get things done than you actually have. It
may cause you to waste time doing things that are irrelevant to your goals or tasks.
Events, deadlines, or the future itself generally arrive much sooner than expected
and catch you off guard, often leaving you in a panic or a crisis.
✓ You can’t reactivate a large number or wide variety of past events. Typically,
the more children mature, the greater the number and variety of past events they
can conjure up. But the lags caused by ADHD keep the capacity for visual imag-
ery and reheard experiences fairly primitive. This deficit in nonverbal working
memory creates a major gap in the resources that adults with ADHD have to
guide their behavior compared to typical adults. So to others you might look like
you don’t think before you act. It would be more accurate to say you have trouble
remembering—or more accurately, resensing—before you act.
Sam is known to friends as tactless because he blurts out whatever comes to mind;
he can’t read social cues because he doesn’t attend to them and thus has no archive
Nonverbal working memory
may be what makes selfish
altruism part of human nature.

remembering—or more accurately, resensing—before you act.
Sam is known to friends as tactless because he blurts out whatever comes to mind;
he can’t read social cues because he doesn’t attend to them and thus has no archive
Nonverbal working memory
may be what makes selfish
altruism part of human nature.

80 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
of such images to serve as a repertoire of subtle facial expressions and what they
communicate.
✓ Long, complicated sequences of behavior may pose a serious challenge for you.
Knowing how to behave in delicate social situations, sticking with the rules of a
complex game, completing a multistep task like filing a tax return—all of these
typical adult scenarios may leave you with no clue because your brain has diffi-
culty holding all those mental images.
Sebastian’s hyperactivity as a child kept him out of the team sports he loved, so
he thought he’d join the company softball team to make up for lost time. He no
longer got tagged out for constantly leading off a base, but from inning to inning
he’d forget how the opposing players hit, who was a fast runner, what the status of
the game was, and how his own team members fielded. So he was always in the
wrong place at the wrong time and led his team in errors. After being benched for
a couple games he quit the team.
✓ Vicarious learning may not be so available to you. If you have trouble learn-
ing from the successes and mistakes you’ve observed in others, you’re stuck learn-
ing everything the slow, painful way: by yourself, on your own, through trial and
error.
Claire’s coworkers sometimes wondered whether she was taking drugs. Otherwise,
how could she have failed to notice the reaction others got when they interrupted
the boss at a meeting, took too long to return a customer’s call, or missed a report
deadline? When she complained bitterly about being barked at in front of everyone
for these transgressions, they all wrote her off as “either an idiot or stoned.”
✓ You have little foresight. If you can’t hold past images in mind long enough—
or hold enough of them—to see patterns developing, you won’t be able to predict
what’s likely to happen next and get ready for it.
Mike had gotten enough tickets to have the image of a flashing red light approach-
ing his car from behind emblazoned on his brain. Yet when he impulsively drove
30 miles per hour over the speed limit to get to his night class on time, he couldn’t
predict that he’d get stopped again—but he did.
✓ Self-awareness comes slowly to you. If you can’t monitor how you’re doing,
whether in a routine task or a social situation, it’s not easy to see where you are in
relation to your long-term goals. You may not get the mental signals that it’s time
to chart a new course when that old one is not taking you where you want to go.

✓ Self-awareness comes slowly to you. If you can’t monitor how you’re doing,
whether in a routine task or a social situation, it’s not easy to see where you are in
relation to your long-term goals. You may not get the mental signals that it’s time
to chart a new course when that old one is not taking you where you want to go.

executive Functions 81
Sonya really wanted a lasting relationship. But whenever she was at a party, she’d
drink too much, get too personal with strangers, talk incessantly so that no one
got a word in edgewise, and make cracks about other women’s outfits. Any guy
she met who was interested at first drifted off quickly. When Sonya got home at
the end of the evening, she invariably looked at herself in the mirror, pronounced
herself “hot,” and then brooded about why all the guys were such “losers.”
✓ Without a strong sense of the future, you’ll opt for the quick reward, sacrific-
ing gradual accumulation of assets. You’ll be like the grasshopper who whiles away
the summer singing while the ant stores food for the winter, or the first little pig
who quickly built a house of mere straw while his more self-controlled sibling took
longer but built his house more substantially of brick. When the winter arrives
or the wolf is at the door, the quick shortcut is never as good as the effort to pay
attention to the longer term.
Tim and Marie were on the verge of divorce. Tim claimed he wanted to buy a
house as much as his wife did, but every time they went on vacation, he’d listen
to some time-share pitch and end up signing a contract for a week at yet another
resort that Marie didn’t necessarily want to return to. At the rate they were going,
the couple wouldn’t be able to buy a house until they were 70, unable to save for a
down payment after these “investments.”
✓ You may not make a good team player . . . or know how to be a good friend.
When the grasshopper was starving, the ant rebuked him for failing to think
ahead and create a nutritional stockpile. Social insurance can save your life. But
if you have no concept of the future, sharing what you have with others makes no
sense. All you can appreciate at the moment is the loss of your own hard-earned
assets. You can see where this is going for adults with ADHD: You may have little
capacity for or interest in sharing, cooperation, turn taking, and repaying the
favors of others or fulfilling the promises you’ve made to them. They may very well
respond to your requests for help as the ant did to the grasshopper.
LaTonya didn’t understand why so many of her friends didn’t return her phone
calls. Her friends complained to each other that she was awfully quick to bum a
ride or ask for another favor or even money but never hesitated to say no when
one of them needed help from her. She owed every one of them a small amount of
money but consistently claimed she couldn’t afford it when a friend was short of
cash and asked if LaTonya could pick up the tab for a fast-food burger. Many of
them eventually became ex-friends.

ride or ask for another favor or even money but never hesitated to say no when
one of them needed help from her. She owed every one of them a small amount of
money but consistently claimed she couldn’t afford it when a friend was short of
cash and asked if LaTonya could pick up the tab for a fast-food burger. Many of
them eventually became ex-friends.

82 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
Verbal Working Memory: Using the Mind’s Voice
The next or fourth executive function to develop in children that facilitates self-
control is the ability to talk to yourself, especially in your mind. As kids we do
this publicly. We narrate our play, talk to ourselves when alone, and weigh our
decisions out loud. As every parent knows, kids can be pretty free with their com-
mentary, even though their remarks may not be too flattering. Gradually children
begin to talk to themselves silently, though they may still move their lips. By ages
7–9 they suppress even those movements, and now this voice occurs entirely in
their mind. From this point on, the voice in our head will accompany us through
all our waking hours until we die.
How Verbal Working Memory Guides Us
I also refer to this as the mind’s voice. The capacity to converse with yourself,
especially mentally, in concert with the capacity to sense to yourself brings about
another form of self-regulation and with it a number of important features for
self-control:
1. 
It allows us to describe and contemplate an event or situation. Let’s say
you come home from work and say hello to your roommate, and he doesn’t answer.
Nonverbal working memory might tell you that the look on his face indicates
he’s not happy. With verbal working memory, you might put words to the way
he could be feeling: “He’s angry.” But that’s still a global and vague sense of the
situation. You might then use your mind’s voice to look for more information by
asking yourself specific questions, such as “Is he angry at me, at his girlfriend, his
boss, or someone else?” Describing the situation to yourself and even interrogating
yourself with such questions gets you much more specific information than just a
mental image might achieve and could head you away from a hasty “What’s wrong
with you?” and toward a more nuanced and socially sensitive reply. You might say
Which of the preceding difficulties are big ones for you?

executive Functions 83
to yourself, “He’s not glaring at me. He’s just stomping around the room looking
mad. Last time it turned out he was just ticked off that he had missed a short putt
while golfing that morning or had to work that weekend.”
2. 
It makes problem solving possible. With private speech we can inter-
rogate ourselves about our past to figure out how to solve a current dilemma. In
trying to figure out how best to respond to your aggravated roommate, you might
ask yourself, “What happened last time I assumed he was mad at me?” This intro-
spection might reveal that you picked a fight, which your roommate was all too
happy to engage in so he could take out his ire on someone. Your conclusion might
then be that you need to find a way to ask him what’s wrong without being either
defensive or offensive.
3. 
We can formulate rules and plans. We need verbal working memory
(our mind’s voice) to examine how things went in the past and extract from that
rules for making sure they go well in the future. Our self-questioning and other

then be that you need to find a way to ask him what’s wrong without being either
defensive or offensive.
3. 
We can formulate rules and plans. We need verbal working memory
(our mind’s voice) to examine how things went in the past and extract from that
rules for making sure they go well in the future. Our self-questioning and other
self-talk allow us to weigh pros and cons based on our past experience, to talk
to ourselves about what we could change to improve the future, and to set out
steps toward a goal. Our rules might involve diet and other lifestyle matters, social
conduct, spending or saving habits, and more. Often, we make our self-statements
and rules external and easier to follow by writing them down on a to-do list to help
us remember and use later.
Eventually we go further and generate a hierarchy of rules about rules (called
meta-rules). An example of a meta-rule in government might be the procedure
required for enacting new legislation. In a school, it might be that the criteria for
expelling a student must be approved by the school board. An example from daily
life is the six well-known steps to solving a problem: (a) state the problem specifi-
cally, (b) list as many solutions as you can, (c) critique each one for its utility, (d)
select the one most likely to achieve your goal, (e) implement it, and (f) evaluate
its success. They are simply rules used to discover other, more specific rules that
apply in a specific situation.
4. 
We can follow rules we’re given. Using nonverbal and verbal working
memory together, we call up mental pictures of similar situations from the past
and then ask ourselves whether a rule we’ve learned applies here. If we don’t really
want to follow the rule anyway, we might use self-talk to either persuade ourselves
to obey or convince ourselves that this is one of those exceptions that make the
rule. Our self-speech complements our visual imagery by allowing us to get much
more information out of our thinking than an image alone can convey.
5. 
We can hold in mind what we have silently read to ourselves or heard
others say. In school it was called reading and listening comprehension. In the adult
world it’s necessary in most of what we do. We need to understand and remember

84 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
what we’ve read in reports and heard others summarize at work. We need to grasp
the rules and procedures at our kids’ school so that we don’t put the kids at a
disadvantage. If a bill goes unpaid, we need to comprehend the consequences
explained in the statement and what action we must take to avoid the financial
and legal fallout.
6. 
We’re capable of moral reasoning. The rules—laws, ethics, customs—of
the culture we live in play an important role in guiding our behavior. If we don’t
know what they are and can’t talk to ourselves to remember what they are and
how to apply them when we most need them, we can end up on the fringes of
society, if not ousted altogether.
How ADHD Interferes with Verbal Working Memory
Is verbal working memory the type of self-control that eludes you most?
✓ You talk out loud too much, especially when interacting with others, and often
get off on irrelevant tangents: Verbal working memory is based on our capacity to
talk to ourselves using our inner or mind’s voice. We can simulate what we will
say, practice it, and then edit or change it as needed so that when we do say
things to others those things are more tactful and hence more likely to promote

get off on irrelevant tangents: Verbal working memory is based on our capacity to
talk to ourselves using our inner or mind’s voice. We can simulate what we will
say, practice it, and then edit or change it as needed so that when we do say
things to others those things are more tactful and hence more likely to promote
the relationship and our own welfare. ADHD delays this ability to think and talk
to ourselves privately in order to consider what we are about to say to others. So
a lot of verbal thinking is done out loud, publicly, and is often inappropriate for
that context. This can cause you to ramble on and on while freely associating to
whatever thoughts come into your mind, to interrupt, and to verbally intrude on
others’ interactions. All of these behaviors can be interpreted as rudeness and
lack of consideration for the feelings and intentions of others. And because of the
reduced capacity for self-awareness and monitoring that is also inherent in adult
ADHD, you may not even be aware of how you’re coming across.
✓ You don’t use self-talk to control yourself or solve problems. Without the ben-
efit of self-talk, you shoot from the hip all the time. You might make a lot of
false assumptions about people’s intentions because you don’t examine your first
impression. You might literally attack any problem rather than thinking it through.
You might go through roommate after roommate and end up living alone.
✓ You let events and the environment rule. If you can’t use self-speech to for-
mulate your own rules and plans, you’re always at the mercy of the moment. You’re
also vulnerable to the influence of others, whose advice and directives substitute
for your own self-determined rules of behavior.

executive Functions 85
Hien was a “good kid” according to his teachers and his parents. But as he became
independent, he seemed increasingly subject to bad influences. There was always
someone at the local tavern who would convince Hien that he could buy another
round. There was always a whim that would carry Hien into some ill-advised
decision even though later he agreed with his parents that he should have known
better.
✓ You have trouble setting your own standards and making your own plans.
Without visual imagery and the ability to question your own past behavior, you
won’t extrapolate a list of dos and don’ts for future use.
Nina struggles with her weight, but she can’t seem to resist a tempting dessert or
snack when she sees it, so she keeps eating a diet that adds pounds to her frame.
Without verbal working memory along with nonverbal working memory, Nina
can’t connect her impulsive eating habits with her weight gain or stick to a diet.
Carmelita is tired of being broke, but when she has paycheck in hand, she can’t
seem to stop shopping. If she could reflect on the consequences of those actions, she
might be able to talk herself into going to the bank first and depositing a portion of
her check in her savings account or even having her employer do this automati-
cally.
Both women have occasionally tried to make rules to help themselves. Nina
decided to severely limit her consumption of fat and sugar. Carmelita decided to
put $100 from each paycheck into her savings account. The problem was that
neither of them could make adjustments when their plans didn’t work out. Nina’s
diet made her feel so deprived that she “cheated” constantly and never lost weight.

decided to severely limit her consumption of fat and sugar. Carmelita decided to
put $100 from each paycheck into her savings account. The problem was that
neither of them could make adjustments when their plans didn’t work out. Nina’s
diet made her feel so deprived that she “cheated” constantly and never lost weight.
With verbal working memory to aid her, she could have eventually created a meta-
rule that before she went on any diet, she would go see her physician and get advice
on a sensible weight-loss routine and then remove the most fattening substances
from her home so they were simply not available and she wasn’t forced to show
self-restraint around them. Carmelita found that her savings account was grow-
ing way too slowly. With verbal and nonverbal working memory, she could have
decided that she would review her spending/saving plan every month to see where
she could save more and spend less and also have her employer deposit her pay-
check automatically, even setting aside a portion in her retirement plan that the
employer would match.
✓ You follow certain rules rigidly. A rule is not doing its job unless it can bend
a little. The world does not operate on absolutes. But if you can’t talk to yourself
about the pros and cons and review with yourself the particulars of the situation
that you’re in, you might follow a rule so rigidly that it will backfire. People with
ADHD often lack flexibility.

86 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
Max heard that certain fish contain toxic levels of mercury, so he’s decided he
won’t eat any fish no matter what type or what its source. He looks foolish to
friends and has offended people who have invited him over or taken him out for
dinner, and he gets indignant and nasty when questioned.
Kaye has a set of workplace rules that she follows religiously because she doesn’t
trust her instincts. For each type of task, she follows the rules that she has devel-
oped on her own or been given outright by her supervisors to be sure she doesn’t
go off course. Following these rules prevents anxiety from consuming her at work
. . . as long as the rules never change. It takes her a long time to adjust when new
rules enter the mix or replace old ones.
✓ . . . Or you don’t follow them at all.
Miguel knew that if he got one more speeding ticket, he’d lose his license. The
only way he could muffle his instinct to floor it was to try calling up images of
his previous tickets, picture what it would be like to be barred from driving, and
continuously talk himself into staying below the speed limit. He didn’t do that, and
now he has to get up 2 hours earlier to take the bus to work.
✓ You might commit crimes and violate ethical and moral codes. Many of soci-
ety’s rules and customs are unspoken. Without verbal and nonverbal working
memory to help you discern them, you can go through life without a clue, break-
ing customs and offending your fellow citizens left and right. Laws are written
down, but without the mind’s voice to remind you of them, you might easily yield
to impulse and do whatever you want. And end up behind bars.
Sasha knew it was against the law to steal a car, but that the “joy ride” she and
her friends took in the neighbor’s unlocked sports car was a felony never entered
her mind at the time. All she thought of at the time was that he wouldn’t miss it
for an hour or two.
✓ You don’t comprehend what you’re exposed to as easily as others— whether

Sasha knew it was against the law to steal a car, but that the “joy ride” she and
her friends took in the neighbor’s unlocked sports car was a felony never entered
her mind at the time. All she thought of at the time was that he wouldn’t miss it
for an hour or two.
✓ You don’t comprehend what you’re exposed to as easily as others— whether
it’s what you read, see, or hear. The give and take between verbal and nonverbal
working memory is what makes it possible for us to make sense of all the input
we receive from the world around us. Without that, we miss out on many, many
mental connections.
Of course Eric could read. But there were holes in what he took from his reading.
His own work was pronounced “sloppy” by his boss because he could quote statis-
tics from various reports but often got things backwards when he drew conclusions
from the data. He sent his son to school on a field trip day without the permission
slip, the bag lunch, or the swimsuit required; his son had to stay at school with a

executive Functions 87
younger class. The family’s electricity had been turned off twice because Eric for-
got to pay the bill and then didn’t notice the deadline for disconnection or the hefty
reconnection fee.
Self-Regulation of Emotion and Self-Motivation:
Using the Mind’s Heart
The fifth executive function that develops is the self-regulation of emotion. Emo-
tions are primitive yet powerful signals we give off to ourselves and others as
to our current feelings, intentions, and state of arousal. But they are also strong
motivators of our subsequent actions. They can arouse us to act or prevent us from
acting. They can tell us to fight or send us into flight. They can signal within and
outside of us our impatience and anger, or joy and affection. If we have no control
over our emotions, we have a lot less control over what we do. Emotions arise
whether we want them to or not. They are triggered naturally by external events
of all kinds. Sadness is triggered by loss (or anticipating loss). Anger is triggered
by unfairness, humiliation, unmet expectations, or unanswered needs. Joy is trig-
gered when our expectations and needs are not only met but exceeded and when
our desires are fulfilled.
But it’s not just external events that bring on emotions. The resensed experi-
ences and self-talk made possible by nonverbal and verbal working memory also
have emotional overtones. Picturing your spouse might bring on a feeling of love;
talking to yourself about some injustice you recently suffered can make you feel
rage.
Fortunately, nonverbal and verbal working memory are also instrumental in
helping us regulate our emotional response. We can use self-talk to deliberate with
ourselves about how we feel and what we should do about it. We can use our visual
imagery and self-speech to try to alter an initial emotional reaction that might
cause problems for us, especially if that initial response pushes us into regrettable
behavior.
What types of verbal working memory problems interfere with your
life?

ourselves about how we feel and what we should do about it. We can use our visual
imagery and self-speech to try to alter an initial emotional reaction that might
cause problems for us, especially if that initial response pushes us into regrettable
behavior.
What types of verbal working memory problems interfere with your
life?

88 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
How Self-Regulation of Emotion Guides Us
1. 
We can control our own arousal. By arousal I mean the urge and energy
to act, or activation. Emotions are intended to spur us into action. But what if
those emotions are exaggerated? Or they are based on a misperception of the
situation? In those cases we’re obviously going to overreact or go off half-cocked
in some way. Controlling our initial emotional reactions to events can prevent us
from doing something rash. Or it can drive us to act when we may be suffering
from inertia or just plain boredom with what we need to get done. With emotional
self-regulation possible, we now have three executive functions that can interact,
each supporting the other. Holding on to the images of the past and our visions
for the future and being able to talk ourselves down can ensure that emotion
doesn’t derail our plans and supports our actions toward a better future, even
in the absence of immediate rewards. Being able to dampen emotional arousal
means we won’t start “talking crazy” to ourselves and change course without seri-
ous consideration. Being able to visualize our goals and how we will feel when we
get there can sustain us through the most boring or unrewarding of immediate
activities necessary to get there.
2. 
We can motivate ourselves when we don’t have external rewards to
push us. Call it drive, willpower, persistence, determination, stick-to-itiveness—
what have you. I call it the mind’s fuel tank because it generates the internal “fuel”
or drive that powers us toward our goals. While I and many other neuropsycholo-
gists think of this as a separate executive function (the sixth here in my list), I
combine it with emotional self-control because that is what helps to create our
self-motivation. The former is therefore indispensable to the latter. By regulat-
ing and even creating our emotions with the other executive functions discussed
Many adults with ADHD say they would be sunk without self-
talk. They also find using visual imagery very beneficial but say it
requires practice, practice, and more practice. What’s been your
experience?

executive Functions 89
above, we endow ourselves with internal motivation when no one else is handing
us any incentive from the outside. Again, it’s the four earlier executive functions
working in concert that allow us to both self-regulate our emotions and then moti-
vate ourselves to keep going when the going gets tough (or boring). Let’s say you
want to volunteer with an organization devoted to protecting the environment.
You make phone call after phone call asking people to support a major recycling
effort. Before long you’re extremely dejected at all the rejections you get. In that
case you use two of the executive functions you already have (visual imagery,
self-talk) to remind you of your successes so far, keep your eye on the ultimate
goal, and push you to keep making those calls. If envisioning your success and the
potential for reaching the goal isn’t enough to get you to pick up that phone again,
maybe you intentionally conjure up images of the destruction of the planet and

self-talk) to remind you of your successes so far, keep your eye on the ultimate
goal, and push you to keep making those calls. If envisioning your success and the
potential for reaching the goal isn’t enough to get you to pick up that phone again,
maybe you intentionally conjure up images of the destruction of the planet and
use the anger these images stimulate to motivate you onward.
3. 
We can make sure we express emotion in socially acceptable ways.
This is a biggie. Because we expect adults to have this executive function, society
reacts pretty negatively to extreme or exaggerated expressions of emotion. We
accept the fact that babies scream at the slightest emotional pain because it’s
a self-preservation mechanism. And we understand perfectly when 3-year-olds
throw a temper tantrum when they don’t get the candy at the grocery store check-
out counter. But we’re embarrassed and disapproving of an adult who bursts into
tears or yells in anger in public over a minor frustration like having to stand in a
long line at the supermarket.
4. 
We have a sense of mastery over ourselves and especially our emo-
tional reactions to events. When we develop our capacity to regulate our emo-
tions in the service of our goals and longer-term welfare, we gain a sense of com-
mand or mastery of our impulsive reactions to events around us. No longer a slave
to our passions, we, and not any potentially provocative events, are in charge of
what we will decide to do in response to what is happening to us. We don’t go
off like a string of firecrackers in reaction to the sequence of events around us
because we have self-discipline. We aren’t entirely controlled by the flow of events
going on around us but instead can exert control over our feelings and reactions as
well as over the events themselves. We take charge of our lives instead of life tak-
ing charge of us. This makes us less mercurial, unpredictable, or capricious in our
responses to events and to others and more measured, stable, and mature, with a
new sense of freedom in our interactions.
There’s a reason we use the expressions “emotional turmoil” and “emotion-
ally charged” to capture the loss of control one can have when emotionally power-
ful events trigger strong feelings in us and the internal disarray we can feel when

90 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
we cannot master those strong reactions to events. Emotion is so powerful that it’s
as if it has an electric charge that is transferred to those around us. We’re expected
to keep it under control so as not to impose our feelings on other people. If we are
able to regulate our own emotions, when we are angry, we can “go to our happy
place” by using images of positive past experiences and talking ourselves into
calming down before we finally react to some emotion-laden event. Responding
impulsively to our first emotional reactions to events is rarely a good idea if we
want to make or keep friends or intimate partners, much less a job.
To put it more plainly, this executive function lets us:
✓ Soothe ourselves when we are having extreme emotional reactions to an
event
✓ Use our own mental images and words to distract ourselves from the pow-
erful stimulus that has set off our strong emotional feelings
✓ Consider and implement an alternative emotion by calling up images and
words associated with more positive emotions and relaxation
✓ Choose a more moderate emotional tone or reaction that is supportive of

✓ Use our own mental images and words to distract ourselves from the pow-
erful stimulus that has set off our strong emotional feelings
✓ Consider and implement an alternative emotion by calling up images and
words associated with more positive emotions and relaxation
✓ Choose a more moderate emotional tone or reaction that is supportive of
rather than detrimental to our own longer-term goals and welfare
This is what emotional self-control is all about: helping us stop and moderate
those powerful knee-jerk emotions and substitute others that are more mature,
socially acceptable, and consistent with our longer-term welfare.
Do you use images of positive past experiences to “talk yourself
down” when angry, anxious, or stressed? Accomplishments
that you’re proud of—whether it’s climbing a mountain, finishing
a detail-filled report, or getting along with everyone at a family
wedding—leave you feeling both calm and motivated and are great
candidates for visual imagery. What are yours?

executive Functions 91
How ADHD Interferes with Self-Regulation of Emotion
Is it emotional self-control that eludes you most?
✓ Your emotional reactions to events are as impulsive as the rest of your behavior
and can make you an outcast. Without the ability to put on the brakes, you don’t
have time to alter your initial emotional reactions. Without well-developed verbal
and nonverbal working memory, you have less capacity for the visual imagery and
self-speech that can help you calm your emotions.
The first characteristic Jay’s friends use to describe him is “hot-headed.” They’ve
all witnessed embarrassing displays of sudden anger from Jay at the slightest provo-
cation, whether it’s a pizza delivered with the wrong toppings or a stranger giving
him “a look” (that no one else can even see). His emotional hair trigger has cost
him social invitations, the trust of coworkers, and a lot of friendships.
✓ Emotional reactions that are disproportionate to the event often steer you
wrong. I’m not talking about abnormal, irrational, or grossly inappropriate reac-
tions. But exaggerated emotion that’s not in keeping with the situation—laughing
loudly at a mild pun made quietly at a funeral, sobbing after a minor snub—can
lead to social rejection. Disproportionate emotional reactions can also throw you
off course. Feeling extremely angry about a minor failure at work could cause you
to leave a job ideally suited to your career goals. Plunging into despair can paralyze
you when you really need to keep moving. Becoming elated by modest success can
convince you that you’ve reached your peak, and you might stop trying to achieve
a goal that you really value.
Vanessa was so ecstatic about her first-ever sales award that she skipped into her
boss’s office and announced that she was going to start her own sales company
and hoped the boss would consider hiring out the company’s sales work to her new
firm. Her initial excitement is understandable, but her unmoderated display of it
to her boss borders on the grandiose.
✓ You find it tough to rouse yourself to do what you need to do. Emotion is defi-
nitely a double-edged sword. You want to keep exaggerated and impulsive emotion
under control. But you also want to be able to call emotion into play to kick your-
self into gear to get things done. You’re more subject than other adults to frustra-
tion, boredom, and resentment. These tendencies already make it hard to stick

nitely a double-edged sword. You want to keep exaggerated and impulsive emotion
under control. But you also want to be able to call emotion into play to kick your-
self into gear to get things done. You’re more subject than other adults to frustra-
tion, boredom, and resentment. These tendencies already make it hard to stick
with tasks. Add in the difficulties you suffer with attention and concentration and
it’s even harder to see a task through. Here’s where emotion can serve you well. If
you can regulate your own emotions, you can use them to kick-start yourself to do

92 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
work or to maintain your general arousal level so you can stay awake, alert, and
focused when you have goals to pursue.
Planning and Problem Solving:
Using the Mind’s Playground
If we can hold images and words in mind, we eventually develop a means to manip-
ulate them. We can take them apart, move them about, and recombine them into
new arrangements or sequences in our heads just for the sake of seeing what the
results are likely to be. It is our imagination. And it is no surprise that humans do
this more than any other species. This is fundamentally a form of mental play, and
it originates, I believe, in the extended period of manual, physical play that all chil-
dren go through as an important stage of early development. Play is simply taking
things apart and recombining them just to see what happens or what you wind up
with when you do so. It begins with manual manipulation of objects in childhood
and progresses to the manipulation of images and even words in your mind. Mind
wandering, fantasy, and mental play are the wellspring of human creativity, inge-
nuity, and problem solving more generally. Where others species can only act and
thus suffer from any mistakes they make, humans can mentally simulate a variety
of possible options for actions, testing each out in their mind for their likely conse-
quences and ideally choosing the optimal. Where other species may be harmed or
even die from their mistakes, we let our simulated ideas die in our place.
Similarly, we play with words as children and then play with combinations of
words in our minds as adults. Both of these forms of play, visual–spatial and ver-
bal, lead to novel recombinations of the material we’re playing with. Most of those
Does emotion run away with you more in some situations than in
others? Which ones?
These are the situations where you’ll have to resolve to pull out
your whole bag of self-talk and visual imagery tricks to stay in
control.

executive Functions 93
recombinations are junk. (Think of some of the “crazy” ideas we all come up with
and then discard when trying to get out of a tough dilemma: “Maybe this cop
won’t give me a ticket if I tell him I was speeding because my wife is in the hospital
about to have a baby” . . . “If I stay up all night tonight and
tomorrow, that should give me enough hours to write that
report that’s already overdue” . . . “I could just stand up both of
the women I made a date with for Saturday, and then neither
one of them would think I preferred to go out with someone
else!”) But some are new ideas or ways to solve problems that
lead to new (and even great) inventions or innovations.
How the Ability to Plan and Problem-Solve Guides Us
1. 
It helps us consider all the options. Planning entails the ability to gener-
ate multiple options for responding to a future event. When we make ourselves

else!”) But some are new ideas or ways to solve problems that
lead to new (and even great) inventions or innovations.
How the Ability to Plan and Problem-Solve Guides Us
1. 
It helps us consider all the options. Planning entails the ability to gener-
ate multiple options for responding to a future event. When we make ourselves
aware of all the possible ways to respond, we’re much more likely to identify and
then pick the best one. Think of brainstorming. This executive function is the
best way to prevent the after-the-fact regret of “Why didn’t I think of that?”
2. 
It helps us decide on the best sequence of actions to reach a goal. In
the form of mental play that we call planning, we take apart and recombine infor-
mation in our mind. Once we’ve got a comprehensive list of options, we can look
at the steps each one might involve and then shuffle those steps around to see
what sequence will be best. We can, in a real sense, mentally simulate these vari-
ous sequences to see how they might actually play out before selecting the one that
best meets our objectives.
3. 
The capacity to mentally manipulate information and play with it
in our minds gives us an incredible capacity for goal-
directed creativity and innovation. Thinking outside the
box just can’t happen without the mental play that this
executive function makes possible. It’s like free will (see
Chapter 8) cubed. Not only do you decide what to do, but
you do it in a way that might not have occurred to anyone
else. Creativity and innovation may mean a faster route to
where we want to go, less effort, or just a better result.
How ADHD Interferes with Planning and Problem Solving
Are your problems with self-control connected to an inability to plan and
problem-solve?
Play is training for
inventiveness in adult
problem solving.
Ironically, the planning
that you may find painfully
slow can help you get a
project done far faster.

94 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
✓ You can’t think on your feet. Yes, I know: People usually view your tendency
to react fast as a negative. But thinking on your feet means choosing a wise course
of action quickly when the need arises suddenly, as it so often does in daily life.
Not only is it tough for you to hold lots of information in mind (because of deficits
in working memory), but without the planning/problem-solving executive func-
tion you can’t manipulate the information quickly to plan out possible courses of
action or to problem-solve your way around obstacles. This doesn’t mean you don’t
decide quickly—you do! That’s the problem—you don’t deliberate over all the
possible options available before making that snap decision.
James desperately wanted to be a firefighter. But when the preliminary training
began, it was immediately clear that he couldn’t make the quick decisions neces-
sary to save a building or its inhabitants.
✓ You can’t get or stay organized. Even when circumstances don’t call for a
snap decision, you’re going to have trouble keeping materials and data organized.
This goes for everything from the documentation for your tax return to your files
at work or your diabetic child’s medical records. If you can’t do the mental play, it’s
hard to envision the game board when you need to make your moves.
Every couple of years Marta decided to redo her family’s personal financial files
because she could “never find anything.” She would yank everything out of the

at work or your diabetic child’s medical records. If you can’t do the mental play, it’s
hard to envision the game board when you need to make your moves.
Every couple of years Marta decided to redo her family’s personal financial files
because she could “never find anything.” She would yank everything out of the
file drawers and start trying to come up with her own system. But invariably she
quickly got lost in all the paper, and her husband, Guillaume, would come home
to find files and documents scattered everywhere.
✓ Putting ideas in the correct order is a big challenge for you. Keep in mind
that when you take something apart, you have to put it back together in a certain
order for it to operate correctly or make sense. Ideas need to be assembled in
their correct order so that they function as intended to solve a problem or make
sense. Reasoning, problem solving, planning, explaining, writing, and otherwise
conveying your ideas rapidly and in a logical sequence are all going to be tough
tasks for you.
Writing and giving instructional presentations was almost impossible for Luis.
This deficit was really holding him back in his career until his boss realized at one
seminar how positively the participants responded to Luis personally. Thanks to
an insightful supervisor, the seminar presentations were recast so that a coworker
went over the instructional steps and Luis provided the anecdotes and inspira-
tional material. The seminars were more successful than ever.

executive Functions 95
Planning and problem-solving skills are central to many adult
endeavors. Deficits in these areas can make you feel inadequate
if you don’t remind yourself that it’s not your intelligence level
that’s the problem; it’s the interference of ADHD. What feelings of
inadequacy can you now see as the unfortunate fallout of ADHD?
The Seven Executive Functions That Foster Self-Control
The mind’s mirror (self-awareness)
The mind’s brakes (inhibition)
The mind’s eye (nonverbal working memory)
The mind’s voice (verbal working memory)
The mind’s heart (emotional self-control)
The mind’s fuel tank (self-motivation)
The mind’s playground (planning and problem-solving)

96
10
The Nature of ADHD
and How You Can
Master It
I hope you can now see that ADHD in adults is not merely
a trivial problem with paying attention! Instead it’s a far-
reaching problem affecting the most important human
capacities: It’s a condition that robs you of the ability to
ignore impulses. It’s a deficit in the brain’s executive func-
tioning that makes it very difficult to regulate and organize
your behavior over time to prepare best for the future.
Nearsighted to the Future
To put it simply, you and other adults with ADHD
are blind to time—or at least myopic. You’re not
lacking knowledge or skill. Your problems lie in
the executive mechanisms that take what you
already know and the skills you already possess
and apply them to more effective behavior toward
others and the future. In a sense, your intellect (knowledge) has been discon-
nected from your daily actions (performance). You may
know how to act but may not act that way when placed in
social settings where these actions would benefit you.
Your lack of a sense of time has debilitating, even
heartbreaking, effects. You probably don’t prepare for pre-
dictable events until they are practically upon you—if at
all. This pattern is a recipe for a life of chaos and crisis.

know how to act but may not act that way when placed in
social settings where these actions would benefit you.
Your lack of a sense of time has debilitating, even
heartbreaking, effects. You probably don’t prepare for pre-
dictable events until they are practically upon you—if at
all. This pattern is a recipe for a life of chaos and crisis.
Anyone who tells you all you
need to do is buckle down
and pay attention should
read Step Two of this book.
ADHD is a disorder of performance—
of doing what you know rather than
knowing what to do.
You don’tchoose to skip
planning or to bypass
forethought. Your
predicament is not your fault.

How You Can Master AdHd 97
You’re left to squander your energies dealing with the emergencies or urgencies of
the immediate moment when a little forethought and planning could have eased
the burden and likely averted the crisis.
Dealing with Your ADHD: The Big Picture
This description of ADHD tells us that the strategies and tools that can help you
most will be those that help you do what you know:
✓ Treatments for ADHD will be most helpful when they assist you in doing
what you know at the point of performance in the natural environments
where you conduct your daily life. That point is the place and time in your
life where problems may be occurring because you don’t stop and think
before you act and thus don’t allow what you know to be activated, come
forward, and help guide your choices.
✓ The farther away in space and time a treatment is from this point, the less
likely it is to help you.
✓ Assistance with the time, timing, and timeliness of behavior is critical.
This means modifying your environment to help you do what you need to
do when you need to do it. It also means keeping your scaffolding or aids
in place.
Fit the Solution to the Specific Problem
Chapters 7–9 described seven types of self-control you might struggle with to dif-
ferent degrees. All of the following guidelines for designing effective treatments,
strategies, tools, and coping methods can help you address deficits in the executive
functions. In choosing your own aids or accommodations, however, you might pay
particular attention to those aimed at the deficits you identified with most.
✓ Implement ways to become more aware of your actions and to inhibit or adjust
them as warranted. Addressing the deficiencies in self-awareness caused by ADHD
is no easy matter. In children, repeatedly reviewing video taken with a smart-
phone that shows the child’s behavior while doing homework, playing with others,
or engaging in some other activity has proven helpful to children with ADHD
and even autism spectrum disorder. But it’s not likely to work for adults. Another
thing we do for children might, however, be adaptable. This is transition planning.
Before a child engages in a new activity or enters a new social situation, a parent

or engaging in some other activity has proven helpful to children with ADHD
and even autism spectrum disorder. But it’s not likely to work for adults. Another
thing we do for children might, however, be adaptable. This is transition planning.
Before a child engages in a new activity or enters a new social situation, a parent

98 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
or teacher stops the child, reviews the rules for the upcoming situation with the
child, has the child repeat them back, and then reviews what consequences will
ensue for obeying or not obeying the rules.
You might be able to recruit a family member or your partner to do something
similar, softly inquiring before an upcoming important situation how you would
like to act in and get out of this new situation. Your partner could even gently
offer some additional tips for achieving those outcomes. You two could also agree
to some sort of nonverbal cue or even a single word that only you two know is a
signal to stop, become more aware of what you are doing, check out how others
have been reacting to you, and adjust your behavior accordingly. For instance, if
my voice became too loud at dinner parties (a common problem for me), my wife
would give me a subtle signal (lightly putting her index finger to her lips if I was
looking at her, gently kicking my shin under the table, or even nudging me with
her elbow), which was usually enough for me to quickly soften my voice. You could
do the same in many such situations.
Similarly, you could ask a coworker or friendly supervisor if you can meet
several times a day to discuss your goals and review your progress toward them.
We are more likely to behave better, progress in our work, and even improve in our
other self-change programs (exercising, losing weight, quitting smoking, and the
like) if we make ourselves accountable to a trusted other for doing so.
✓ Externalize information that is usually held in the mind. This simply means
putting key pieces of information into some physical form and putting it where the
problem now exists so you can see it immediately when in that situation. Stop try-
ing to use mental information so much and back it up with the support of some
visual aids or cues.
If your boss or someone else has given you a set of
instructions for getting something done over the next few
days, stop trying to carry this around in your head and
remember it over that period of time. That won’t work with
ADHD. Instead, always carry a small journal and pen or your
cell phone in your pocket and instantly write down the task,
any steps given to you to get it done, and the deadline. Then
keep this in front of you where your work is to be done over the next few days to
serve as your external working memory—your reminder to get it done. If you are
into technology, think of this as offloading the demands on your mental working
memory onto some other storage device—in this case, paper or your cell phone.
You can even translate this plan into smaller steps and insert them into your day
planner or to-do list as goals for each hour of the day and of the next few before
the work is due. The specific technique or external storage device here is not what
is important—the principle behind it is!
Tools to get:
Small notebook
Pen


You can even translate this plan into smaller steps and insert them into your day
planner or to-do list as goals for each hour of the day and of the next few before
the work is due. The specific technique or external storage device here is not what
is important—the principle behind it is!
Tools to get:
Small notebook
Pen


How You Can Master AdHd 99
✓ Make time physical. ADHD makes you
concentrate mainly on the moment, taking your
focus away from the signals and internal sense that
time is passing. Use kitchen timers, clocks, com-
puters, calendars, smartphones, tablets, and any
other devices that can break time down by the
hour and issue alarms when a chunk of time has
passed. The more external you make the passage of
time and structure that time with periodic physical
reminders, the more likely you are to manage your
time well.
✓ Use external incentives. Arrange for fre-
quent external types of motivation to help get you
through any job. For instance, break your project
into smaller steps and give yourself a small reward
for completing each hour or half hour of sustained
work. Motivational “prostheses” are nearly essen-
tial to your fulfilling longer-term projects, assign-
ments, personal plans, or social promises. Whether
the reward is getting a quick cup of coffee, tea, or
a soda to take back to your work area, briefly
checking on the status of your favorite sports team
on the Internet, listening to a short tune on your
music player or radio, or even just giving yourself a treat, arrange small rewards for
completing smaller work quotas instead of waiting until the work is all done.
✓ Normalize the underlying neurological deficits in the brain’s executive system.
To date, the only treatment that shows any hope of achieving this end is medica-
tion. The ADHD medicines (see Step Three), such
as stimulants or the nonstimulants atomoxetine
or guanfacine, can improve or even normalize the
neurological substrates in the executive regions of
the brain that likely underlie this disorder and their
related networks. The medications do not reverse
these deficits permanently; they do, however, have
a remarkable positive effect while they remain in
your system.
✓ Replace distractions with physical cues or reminders to focus on the task
at hand. Use whatever physical prompts will keep your mind focused on the task
and goals at hand.
Rewards to consider:
Coffee, tea, soda
Check your favorite team’s
status on the Internet
Listen to a short tune on
your phone or other device
Any small edible treat (as
in candy, a cookie)

Caution: Going on the Internet to
check one thing like a sports score
can lead to looking up 67 things.
This is why knowing your own
ADHD is so important: This reward
may not be the right one for you!
Tools to use—any of the
following:
Kitchen timer
Computer appointment
reminders
Smartphone alarms
Day planners/calendars
broken down by hours


check one thing like a sports score
can lead to looking up 67 things.
This is why knowing your own
ADHD is so important: This reward
may not be the right one for you!
Tools to use—any of the
following:
Kitchen timer
Computer appointment
reminders
Smartphone alarms
Day planners/calendars
broken down by hours


100 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
✓ Externalize your rules. Make the rules into physical
lists. Post signs, lists, charts, and other aids in the appropri-
ate school, work, or social environment and frequently refer
to them while you are in those situations. You can even talk
out loud in a low voice to yourself and state these rules aloud
before and while you are in these situations. You can also use
a device to record and play back these reminders (using ear-
phones to avoid distracting others!).
✓ Break down any task that includes large time gaps into smaller chunks spaced
more closely together. For instance, rather than accept a project that must be done over
the next month as is, break it down into much smaller
steps and do a step a day toward that eventual goal.
That way, each step does not seem so overwhelming.
And you can stay motivated using immediate feed-
back and incentives for completing each step.
✓ Stay flexible and be prepared to change
your plan. As with a chronic medical condition
such as diabetes, a treatment plan is made up of lots
of interventions that provide symptom relief. But
over time, symptom breakthroughs and crises are
likely to occur periodically. Don’t be afraid to
change course—ask for help
in doing so whenever you
need it—and look for new ways to compensate for the defi-
cits ADHD imposes on you. It’s only what you deserve.
With these major ideas in mind, you are now ready
to master your ADHD. Never forget that with proper
assistance—including education, counseling, medication,
behavioral strategies, hard work, advocacy, and the support
of family and friends—you can make significant and pos-
sibly dramatic improvements in your life.
You’ll meet all these
guidelines again, in the
form of rules for everyday
success in Step Four and
applications to particular
areas of your life in Step Five.
The more you ingrain them,
the more effectively you take
charge of adult ADHD.

Never stop looking for
ways to compensate. You
never know everything, so
try to remind yourself not
to get too confident once
you start making progress
in working with your ADHD.
There is no scientific evidence for the effectiveness of intervention outside
the points of performance in your life where your major problems occur. Avoid
talk- or insight-oriented therapy, psychoanalysis, weekly group therapy focus-
ing on complaining, and similar treatments.
Cues to use:
Cards
Lists
Signs
Sticky notes


101
11
Own Your ADHD
Now you know your ADHD. Are you ready to own it?
Being able to identify with the symptoms, impairments, and deficits you’ve
read about so far can make it easier to accept having ADHD. You can even
develop a sense of humor about it. But that doesn’t mean it won’t take time. Many
people need to adapt to the idea that they have this condition and that it’s not
going to go away. Are you having any of these reactions?
✓ Are you in denial about having ADHD? Initial denial is not so unusual
but getting stuck there is usually a result of having been coerced to get an
evaluation.
✓ Are you feeling a sense of profound relief? Finally knowing what you have

people need to adapt to the idea that they have this condition and that it’s not
going to go away. Are you having any of these reactions?
✓ Are you in denial about having ADHD? Initial denial is not so unusual
but getting stuck there is usually a result of having been coerced to get an
evaluation.
✓ Are you feeling a sense of profound relief? Finally knowing what you have
and how it accounts for your lifelong struggles can alleviate a lot of self-
blame and allow you to stop rehashing the past and get on with the future.
✓ Did you feel demoralized or depressed at first? It’s perfectly natural to feel
sad about having a chronic, incurable condition. But knowing how much
help is available is a great antidote.
✓ Do you feel angry and frustrated? You might feel this way for various rea-
sons, especially if you’ve gotten inaccurate diagnoses for years. Resent-
ment over all that wasted time and all those unnecessary struggles is natu-
ral. The antidote is getting the help you deserve now that you know what’s
wrong.
✓ Are you sad and angry? If ADHD has dam-
aged your life in ways that can’t be repaired, you
might alternate between these emotions. You
may have to work your way through these reac-
tions, possibly with the help of a counselor, to
free your energies for improving the future.
It’s hard to let go of the pain
of lost relationships, jobs,
education, and overall
well-being that you’ve suffered
as a result of untreated ADHD.

102 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
Fortunately, your future does not have to look like your past. If you’re feeling
strong grief, especially if it seems to be sticking around, some counseling sessions
with a professional can help you understand, vent, and resolve these reactions.
Then they stand an excellent chance of being replaced by acceptance and hope.
Still need some help to own your ADHD? Then take a look at the TED Talk
“Failing at Normal” (www.youtube.com/watch?v=JiwZQNYlGQI),
the YouTube video Jessica McCabe and Rick Green Get Real about
ADHD (www.youtube.com/watch?v=wxMpajLtu_g), where McCabe
and Canadian comedian Rick Green take a humorous approach to
owning their ADHD while conveying important ideas of how to
accept it and cope with it. Or see more videos from Jessica McCabe’s
YouTube channel, How to ADHD.
An Explanation, Not an Excuse
You are not a victim. ADHD is not an irreparable handicap. The fact that you’re
reading this book says you are looking for answers, not excuses. But some of the
people around you may be inclined to view you as a less capable individual because
you have this condition. They may believe it’s OK not to hold you accountable
for your actions now that you have an official diagnosis. I’m sure you don’t want
to be treated that way any more than someone in a wheelchair would. Your job
going forward is not to excuse yourself from the tasks made difficult by ADHD but
to seek out the ADHD equivalent of wheelchair ramps into a building—making
accommodations in your physical environment so you are less impaired by your
ADHD in various settings. Ramps don’t correct a disorder, but they do reduce or
eliminate the impairments or negative consequences that can occur from that
disorder. Find those ramps whenever you can and build them into your life. The
alternative is to wheel around and go back home defeated.
Not only should no one excuse you from the immediate or future conse-
quences of your actions, but you should actually take action to tighten up that

eliminate the impairments or negative consequences that can occur from that
disorder. Find those ramps whenever you can and build them into your life. The
alternative is to wheel around and go back home defeated.
Not only should no one excuse you from the immediate or future conse-
quences of your actions, but you should actually take action to tighten up that
accountability by making consequences more frequent, immediate, and salient.
You’ll succeed best when held accountable for your plans, goals, and actions more
often than others are across the day so you receive more frequent feedback.
So, make (and accept) no excuses! Own your ADHD, own its consequences,
and then seek to minimize or eliminate those disastrous delays in life that are
preventing you from being as effective, productive, and successful as people who
don’t have ADHD. Find your ramps or build them as necessary, but don’t quit on
your plans and goals.
Your future does
not have to look
like your past.

own Your AdHd 103
Having ADHD Is Not Your Fault . . . but Accepting
It Is Your Responsibility
We now know that you probably came by ADHD through a combination of bio-
logical and genetic factors, as summarized below. We are also very close to being
able to conclude unequivocally that ADHD cannot and does not arise from purely
social factors, such as child rearing, family conflict, marital difficulties, insecure
infant attachment, television or video games or other “screen time,” the pace of
modern life, or interactions with peers.
The good news is that this means having ADHD cannot possibly be your fault.
The less good news is that it also means there is no cure. You can’t get rid of the
underlying condition by changing your diet or your surroundings. Nor can you
alter any factor in your life in the hope of protecting your children from ending up
with ADHD. You can, however, drastically reduce the effects of ADHD on your
life. Take Step Three (medication) and you may improve the underlying neuro-
logical problems significantly. Then take Step Four and find out what else you can
do to change your life for the better.
What the research shows about the causes of ADHD:
• 
Studies of twins and families have made it abundantly clear that heredity and
other genetic factors are the major causes of ADHD. If a child has ADHD, nearly
one out of three siblings will also have ADHD. A study done at UCLA examined
256 parents of children with ADHD and found that in 55% of these families, at
least one parent was affected by the disorder.
• 
An estimated 75–80% of variation in the severity of ADHD traits across people
is the result of genetic factors, and some studies place this figure at over 90%—
higher than the genetic contribution to personality traits, intelligence, and other
mental disorders such as anxiety and depression and just slightly less than the
genetic contribution to individual differences in height.
• 
Several recent studies have scanned the entire human genome searching for
genes that carry the risk of ADHD. Twelve were found that had a robust or reli-
able association with risk for ADHD. And other studies indicate there may be at
least 10 to 15 or more other sites on chromosomes that are likely to be asso-
ciated with ADHD. It is therefore likely that ADHD arises from a combination

genes that carry the risk of ADHD. Twelve were found that had a robust or reli-
able association with risk for ADHD. And other studies indicate there may be at
least 10 to 15 or more other sites on chromosomes that are likely to be asso-
ciated with ADHD. It is therefore likely that ADHD arises from a combination

104 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
of multiple risk genes, with each contributing a small likelihood of risk for the
disorder. The more risk genes you inherit, the greater the number and sever-
ity of ADHD symptoms you will have, and the greater the probability you will be
impaired by and diagnosed with the disorder.
• 
A very small number of cases are caused by early- development (often prena-
tal) neurological injury, such as alcohol exposure during pregnancy, premature
delivery (especially with minor brain hemorrhaging), early lead poisoning, stroke,
and brain trauma, to name just a few.
• 
The frontal lobes, basal ganglia, cerebellum, and anterior cingulate cortex are
3–5% smaller, substantially less active, and far more variable in that activity in
people with ADHD than in others of the same age.
• 
Studies show that the brains of those with ADHD react to events more slowly
than the brains of those without ADHD. People with ADHD have less blood flow
to the right frontal region of the brain than those who don’t have ADHD, and the
severity of symptoms increases the more blood flow is reduced.
What the research says about popular myths regarding the causes of ADHD:
• 
Available evidence suggests that sugar plays no role in the disorder and that
fewer than 1 in 20 preschool children with ADHD may have their symptoms
worsened by additives and preservatives, and even then, only by food coloring,
not other types of additives.
• 
No compelling evidence exists to support the claim that ADHD results from
watching too much TV, playing too many video games, or spending too much
screen time on your smart devices, though people growing up with ADHD may
be more likely to watch television, play video games, or use visual media due
to its highly reinforcing quality. Indeed, 15–20% of teens and young adults with
ADHD may qualify as having a gaming or Internet addiction.
• 
Little evidence has emerged that child-rearing practices can cause ADHD.
There is no question that families with children who have ADHD show more
conflict and stress than other families. But researchers found that this was
largely due to the disruptive impact of the child’s ADHD on family functioning
and also to the likelihood that the parent also had ADHD.

own Your AdHd 105
Shaping Your Environment Will Help You Manage Your ADHD
Steps Four and Five are largely about using strategies to help you compensate for
the symptoms that medication can’t erase entirely. But what they really do is help
you tweak your environment to make it workable for you.
As an adult with ADHD, you probably feel like you’ve been hit with a double
whammy: Your symptoms make routine tasks twice as hard (at least) for you as for
other adults. And the world doesn’t seem too inclined to mold itself around your
needs. As I’ve said before, you can defuse whammy number one to a great extent
with medication (Step Three). As to whammy number two, no, the world is gener-
ally not going to volunteer to remake itself for your purposes. But there’s a lot you
can do to control your environments so that they do meet your needs:

needs. As I’ve said before, you can defuse whammy number one to a great extent
with medication (Step Three). As to whammy number two, no, the world is gener-
ally not going to volunteer to remake itself for your purposes. But there’s a lot you
can do to control your environments so that they do meet your needs:
✓ You can choose to operate in environments where you
stand the best chance of success.
• 
Can’t deal with a pencil-pushing, number-crunching
job? Aim for jobs that capitalize on your personality,
your physical energy, or your gregarious nature, like
sales or the performing arts.
• 
Consider becoming an entrepreneur within your
company or one who is self-employed. In such cre-
ative endeavors, you can indulge your penchant for new or far-fetched
ideas. Some of your ideas may lead to novel and profitable innovations
for your employer or your own company.
• 
Love the world of literature or medicine but can’t deal with the detail?
Find the department that emphasizes travel and meetings. Adopt
workplace strategies that help you get through the grunt work you can’t
avoid. See if you can hire an administrative assistant who can manage
the paperwork and other boring but essential tasks that may be part of
your profession. Recruit a mentor among your supervisors who will help
you devise less conventional methods for meeting the company’s goals.
These are just a couple of examples of the countless ways you can carve
out a friendly daily environment.
✓ You can surround yourself with people who help you play up your strengths
and support your efforts to compensate for weaknesses.
• 
Your softball teammates may be the most fun people you know, but if
you’re always the last to leave the postgame beer fests, maybe you can
ask a teammate to cue you when you had your one- to two-beer quota.
A list of jobs
and careers that
might capitalize
on your strengths
can be found in
Chapter 25.


106 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
• 
If members of your family of origin always expect the worst from you,
keep your distance for a while . . . and then go back to the family gath-
erings once you’ve got a track record that proves you’re the trustworthy
adult that Steps Four and Five can help you be.
✓ You can find the best resources available for those with ADHD and then
use them, use them, use them.
• 
Throughout this book I’ll steer you to time-tested, scientifically proven
treatments and sources of professional help. There’s more out there for
ADHD than almost any other mental health condition that affects
adults.
• 
Feel like someone else is always telling you what’s fact and what’s not?
What’s right for you and what’s wrong? What you should do and what
you should avoid? You can be as well informed as you want to be. On
the following pages you’ll find tips and resources for sifting through
everything you’ll read and hear about ADHD to get at the truth. And
the truth really can set you free.
A Consumer’s Guide to ADHD
I hope that reading about the nature of ADHD in Step Two has made you think
not just about your particular symptoms and the impairments they’ve caused
you, but also about who you are aside from ADHD: not just your mix of symp-
toms and impairments, but your personality, intellectual abilities, physical attri-
butes, talents, living and working environments, and the resources available
to you. Then you’ll be able to take all the general information on ADHD you

you, but also about who you are aside from ADHD: not just your mix of symp-
toms and impairments, but your personality, intellectual abilities, physical attri-
butes, talents, living and working environments, and the resources available
to you. Then you’ll be able to take all the general information on ADHD you
are learning throughout this book and conform it like shrink-wrapping to your
unique life circumstances.
Take Advantage of the Information Out There . . .
Reading this book is a great start toward educating yourself about ADHD, but
it should not be the end. The information available on ADHD in adults could
fill many books of this length. So, read widely, listen to experts (and talk to
any that you can), ask questions, visit the most informative websites, follow
up further on what interests you, and pull together as much information about

own Your AdHd 107
ADHD as you have time to find. Truth is an assembled thing. It comes from no
one book, source, expert, guru, DVD, or website. The more widely you pursue
information, the more able you will be to distinguish trustworthy information
and reliable sources from the fashionable, sensational, flimsy, baseless, or
outright false.
. . . But Take It with a Grain of Salt
I probably don’t have to tell you to be a skeptic. The controversies that sur-
round ADHD and the claims and criticisms from uninformed sources in the
popular media have probably left you ready to doubt what you hear. Great!
This tendency will serve you well as you seek knowl-
edge. Question the material you find. Look for or ask for
the evidence behind the assertions. Especially challenge
claims about treatments that seem too good to be true
(they usually are). By seeking the evidence behind the
claim—for example, using Google Scholar to browse
science journals—you not only evaluate the truth of the
The more
information
you seek, the
easier it gets to
spot the truth.

Sources of ongoing updates on adult ADHD include:
Resources at the back of this book: Start with a few books, view a few
DVDs, then move on as desired to any of the thousands of journal articles in
print, which you can find using Google Scholar as a browser to search science
journals, or go into the settings of that browser and have it email you weekly
with a list of the latest research articles published that week and their links..
Lectures posted on the Internet: Many university psychiatry or clinical psy-
chology departments make some or all of their weekly seminars (called “grand
rounds”) available on the department’s website. YouTube has a number of my
lectures on ADHD that were posted by conferences, hospitals, or universities
where I delivered them.
Websites of nonprofit organizations dedicated to ADHD: Listed in the
Resources at the back of the book.
The professional who diagnosed you: Ask what continuing medical edu-
cation programs and materials he or she uses to stay current on ADHD in
adults and where they can be obtained.

where I delivered them.
Websites of nonprofit organizations dedicated to ADHD: Listed in the
Resources at the back of the book.
The professional who diagnosed you: Ask what continuing medical edu-
cation programs and materials he or she uses to stay current on ADHD in
adults and where they can be obtained.

108 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
information you are consuming but also broaden your knowledge base about
ADHD and related topics. Sort out for yourself what makes sense, what seems
to be the consensus of the clinical and scientific experts who specialize in the
disorder, what other adults with ADHD have found to be of value to them, and
what fits most appropriately for your ADHD.
How do I know when a claim is based on real scientific evidence?
Claims about treatments, causes, and other aspects of ADHD (or any
other condition) can sound authentic even when totally unfounded. Here are
some clues to whether or not the information is reliable:
Check out the source:
• Does the source stand to profit? If the information is tied to a product or
service for sale, think of this as more of an advertising pitch than a pub-
lic service message. Aside from pharmaceutical company ads, this can
also apply to any advertising about devices or other methods claiming to
drastically improve or cure ADHD, such as neurofeedback, omega-3 or -6
supplements, transcranial magnetic stimulation, and especially cognitive
?
A few major organizations that are always good sources of information:
Children and Adults with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
(CHADD): chadd.org
Attention Deficit Disorder Association (ADDA): add.org
ADD Resources: addresources.org
ADD WareHouse: addwarehouse.com
World Federation of ADHD: adhd- federation.org
ADDConsults: addconsults.com
Learning Disabilities Association of America (LDA): ldaamerica.org
National Attention Deficit Disorder Information and Support Service
(ADDISS), Great Britain: addiss.co.uk
Canadian ADHD Resource Alliance: caddra.ca
Centre for ADHD Awareness, Canada (CADDAC): caddac.ca

own Your AdHd 109
rehabilitation apps and games that you play to supposedly improve one or
more of your executive functions (like working memory).
• Does the source have a social, political, or other agenda? Check out its mis-
sion statement on the website. Also do an Internet search on the organi-
zation to find out what others have to say—often a better way to unveil a
hidden agenda. For instance, many people do not realize that the Citizens
Commission on Human Rights and their website are a political advocacy
arm of the Church of Scientology. Having an agenda doesn’t mean the
source’s information isn’t reliable; it just means that overall its message
might not be objective.
• What’s the size, scope, and history of the source? A large national or inter-
national organization that has been around for years is generally more reli-
able than smaller, narrower, and newer ones because a track record of reli-
able information gathers loyal followers across population sectors—as well
as funding.
• Is the source associated with a center of scien-
tific research? Sources like the National Institute
of Mental Health and major research universi-
ties are not just passing on research evidence;
they’re collecting it. This makes them a primary
source of information, meaning the data have
not been subjected to errors or bias or pulled
out of context by secondary and more distant

tific research? Sources like the National Institute
of Mental Health and major research universi-
ties are not just passing on research evidence;
they’re collecting it. This makes them a primary
source of information, meaning the data have
not been subjected to errors or bias or pulled
out of context by secondary and more distant
sources that have adopted it for their own pur-
poses (however well intentioned).
Don’t forget to educate
anyone in a position
to help you—spouse,
family, friends. A common
knowledge base can
help all of you cope more
effectively and establish
realistic goals and
expectations.

To find reliable, up-to-date information on the best possible treatments, search
the Internet for consensus guidelines, promulgated by large, well-respected
associations like the World Federation of ADHD, and for evidence-based
treatments—a slightly more politically tinged and variable term but an attempt
by various bodies to establish criteria for treatments supported by the greatest
amount of reliable research evidence.

110 CHAnGe YouR MIndSeT
Look closely at the content of the claims:
• Does the claim sound too good to be true? It probably is. If ADHD were
caused by easily modified dietary habits or could be erased for good by a
pill or a machine, would millions of adults and kids still have the condition?
• Does it include hard facts and figures? General terms like most, many, hardly
ever, few, experts agree, everyone knows, clinical studies (a fancy name
used in ads for “we gave it to people and they said it worked fine”), and
doctors say can cover up a void in real research data. If the material fails to
give numbers, facts, and names, the claims probably aren’t based on any.
• Are references listed? A wealth of references on which the claims are
based can offset a lack of data in the text; some reliable sources try to
make the take-home messages easy to absorb and then trust you to look
A randomized, controlled, double-blind trial is considered the most reli-
able way to test the effects of a treatment—medication, psychotherapy, or
others—because:
• The study subjects are divided into two groups at random, meaning
by chance. This reduces the opportunity for bias in choosing who gets
what treatment or a placebo. As a result, the results are more likely to
be due to the treatment, if effective, than to some other confounding
variable or factor.
• The population sample is reasonably large and recruited from a variety
of sources, so the study results could be said to be representative of a
wide range of individuals.
• The effects that might be seen for the treatment under scrutiny are
controlled by having one of the groups receive only a placebo (non-
active “fake” treatment, like a sugar pill), so there’s a way to compare.
(When scientists give everyone in a group a placebo, roughly a third
of them will say they got the effect that the active treatment was sup-
posed to produce! This is called the placebo effect.)
• The study is double-blind, meaning there’s no chance of the research-
ers projecting their own bias onto their observations because neither
the study coordinator nor the study subjects know who’s getting the
active treatment and who’s getting the placebo.

posed to produce! This is called the placebo effect.)
• The study is double-blind, meaning there’s no chance of the research-
ers projecting their own bias onto their observations because neither
the study coordinator nor the study subjects know who’s getting the
active treatment and who’s getting the placebo.

Own Your ADHD 111
up the original research. Do a spot-check of such references just to make
sure they’re real even if you’ve decided the source is trustworthy and the
general points are all you need.
• How much evidence is there? Have the research studies been repeated at
a number of labs with similar results? Is the evidence mainly “anecdotal,”
meaning it comes from clinical practice (reports of practitioners from their
observations of patients)? It’s better when it comes from formal lab studies,
with the 24-karat variety being “randomized, controlled, double-blind trials,”
but keep in mind that research is expensive to fund, and many worthy treat-
ments start out with tons of clinical evidence to support them before they
undergo a look in the lab to confirm their findings. It’s also helpful to know
when the same evidence keeps turning up over the years, and studies of
the same population over many years—called longitudinal studies—are the
only way to be sure what effects a medication or other therapy will have
years later, whether you’ve continued taking it or not.
A Twist of Facts
In early 2008 I was interviewed for a New York Times article* reporting on a
groundbreaking study by the National Institute of Mental Health: Brain-imaging
technology graphically showed that kids with ADHD experience a delay in the
development of parts of the brain that affect executive functions like paying
attention and memory. At last we had proof of a biological basis for ADHD.
Surely those who had argued for years that ADHD did not exist would be
enlightened. Imagine the surprise of the NIMH investigators and many other
scientists, like me, when instead this evidence was offered as proof of the
opposite—that ADHD was “merely” a delay and that kids with the symptoms
were normal and would outgrow them. We know from many studies that pos-
sibly only a third of children who qualify for the diagnosis no longer qualify
for it by adulthood. When you read about research evidence, make sure
you know what data the research produced and what conclusions the
scientists drew (such as using Google Scholar). Conclusions drawn by
other parties, especially nonscientists, particularly when they disagree
with the analysis of the investigators, are questionable.
* “Attention Deficits That May Linger Well Past Childhood,” by Aliyah Baruchin, New York Times,
March 13, 2008.



113
Step Three
Change Your Brain
Medications
for Mastering AdHd
Here are some good reasons to consider medication:
• The professional who evaluated you concluded that you have moderate to
severe ADHD.
• Research shows medications are the most effective treatment currently
available for ADHD, being at least twice as effective as nonmedication
treatments like counseling or behavior therapy and improving symptoms
in 70–95% of the adults who take them.
• You’ve tried other therapies and your symptoms are still causing the same
problems they always have.
• You have to do a lot of work independently and can’t depend on others to
routinely structure your work or home life for you.
• You’re having trouble performing well amid all the distractions and pres-

• You’ve tried other therapies and your symptoms are still causing the same
problems they always have.
• You have to do a lot of work independently and can’t depend on others to
routinely structure your work or home life for you.
• You’re having trouble performing well amid all the distractions and pres-
sures of your workplace.
• Your workplace evaluations from your supervisors are increasingly negative
or critical, and you sense you may be on the verge of being laid off or fired.
• Your time management is far poorer than that of your typical peers: You
are chronically late with deadlines, have lots of missed appointments or
meetings, cannot seem to pay your bills on time, and are frequently late
to work.

114 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
• You’ve repeatedly tried to finish your education but can never seem to get
those last few credits completed, projects done, or other class requirements
met that would allow you to graduate.
• You’re tired of spending half your life on damage control and want to stop
feeling demoralized by not having accomplished much of what you had
hoped to achieve by this point.
• You’ve been diagnosed not only with ADHD but also with anxiety, depres-
sion, or another mental or emotional condition.
• Your spouse or someone you’re dating is considering separating from you
because of your ADHD symptoms, your problems with emotional self-
control, and their impact on your relationship.
• Others repeatedly tell you how poor your driving is or how many risks you
take on the road. Maybe you’re in danger of losing your license because of
multiple speeding or parking tickets.
• You have a hard time managing your money, and you know you spend too
much or you use your credit cards more than you really want to.
• You’ve noticed that your health is not as good as that of others. Maybe
you have harmful habits you’d like to get rid of, like smoking, drinking too
much, eating poorly and too much, or not exercising enough, but you can’t
seem to kick them.

115
12
Why It Makes Sense
to Try Medication
*
Medication works.
When people ask why they should try medication as a way to manage their
ADHD, my answer always comes down to those two words. That’s because
ADHD medications are the most effective treatments currently available for mas-
tering your ADHD. Period.
We now know that ADHD medications can normalize the behavior of
50–65% of those with ADHD and result in substantial improvements, if not
normalization, in another 20–30% of people with the disorder.
When you find the medicine that is right for you, you can experience sub-
stantial improvements in your ADHD symptoms. Once you do, you can expect
significant improvements in the impairments caused by those symptoms. In fact,
the positive change brought about by ADHD medications is probably unrivaled by
any medication treatment for any other disorder in psychiatry.
*Dr. Barkley has worked as a paid consultant to and/or speaker for Eli Lilly (United States, Canada,
Spain, Italy, the Netherlands, Sweden, the United Kingdom, Germany), Shire Pharmaceuticals
(now Takeda Pharmaceutical Co.; United States), Novartis (United States, Switzerland, Germany),
Ortho-McNeil (United States), Janssen-Ortho (Canada), Janssen-Cilag (Denmark, the Nether-
lands, South America), Ironshore Pharmaceuticals and Development (United States), and Medice
Pharma Co. (Germany and Switzerland).

(now Takeda Pharmaceutical Co.; United States), Novartis (United States, Switzerland, Germany),
Ortho-McNeil (United States), Janssen-Ortho (Canada), Janssen-Cilag (Denmark, the Nether-
lands, South America), Ironshore Pharmaceuticals and Development (United States), and Medice
Pharma Co. (Germany and Switzerland).

116 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
Why Are These Medications So Effective?
Research over the last decade has shown
that these medications actually correct
or compensate for the neurological prob-
lems underlying ADHD. They do so tem-
porarily, only as long as they are in your
bloodstream and brain, which means you
have to keep taking them to keep getting
their benefits.
Fewer than 10% of people with ADHD
will
not have a positive response to
at least one of the ADHD medications
currently available in the United States.
Here’s how the anti-ADHD medications work neurogenetically:
Brain imaging, EEGs, and a variety of other testing methods have shown
that the brains of those with ADHD are different from those of others in several
important ways:
• 
Certain regions of the brain are different structurally, mainly being smaller
than in those without ADHD: the prefrontal region, associated with atten-
tion and inhibition; the striatal region, associated with pursuing pleasur-
able or rewarding behavior; the anterior cingulate cortex, which helps you
with choices among conflicting actions and consequences, as well as
with self-regulating your emotional reactions; and the cerebellum, asso-
ciated with the timing and timeliness of your actions, as well as the fluid-
ity or gracefulness of those actions, among other executive functions. In
children and teens with ADHD these brain regions are 2–3 years behind
in their maturation.
• 
Studies show that the white-matter fiber bundles in the brain that con-
nect various brain regions and coordinate their functions are less well
developed, less well connected, and highly variable in their activity. This
is particularly true for the frontal– striatal– cerebellar executive circuits.
• 
People with ADHD have less electrical activity in the brain, particularly in
those regions noted just above, and are less responsive to events, mean-
ing they don’t react to stimulation of these regions as much as others do.

Medication 117
• 
Children and adolescents with ADHD may also have less metabolic
activity in certain frontal regions.
• 
The brains of those with ADHD seem to be deficient in or show exces-
sive reuptake of norepinephrine and dopamine in certain regions related
to attention, inhibition, and executive functioning. Other neurochemicals
may also be involved.
Scientists believe the structural abnormalities in the ADHD brain and their
poor functional connectivity likely underlie the development of the disorder:
This is the genetic legacy that causes most ADHD cases and accounts for
why it appears in the descendants of those who have ADHD. In others, the
disorder may arise from injuries to these brain areas, such as from exposure to
prenatal toxins, premature birth, or repeated head trauma during development.
We don’t know how to restore a typical structure to these brains.
We do, however, know how to correct the neurochemical imbalances
and functional irregularities found in those with ADHD, at least temporarily:
medication.
When the neurotransmitters dopamine and norepinephrine are not avail-
able in the same measure as they are in typical adults, the messages these

We do, however, know how to correct the neurochemical imbalances
and functional irregularities found in those with ADHD, at least temporarily:
medication.
When the neurotransmitters dopamine and norepinephrine are not avail-
able in the same measure as they are in typical adults, the messages these
chemicals are supposed to send don’t get through as they should. Without the
help of these neurotransmitters, the brain does not respond to stimulation (any
input, like an event or an idea or an emotion) the way it should. Impulse control
doesn’t kick in when it should. Memories of the past and visions of the future
aren’t triggered and held in working memory to keep you mentally on track.
And even when they are, they cannot be sustained for very long, leading you
to forget what it is you were planning on doing. The motor- control brakes don’t
keep you from fidgeting with restlessness.
This is why ADHD medications work (though some operate on other neu-
rochemicals). By causing nerve cells to express more of these neurochemicals,
keeping the nerve cells from pulling them back in once they’ve been released,
or reducing “noise” in the nerve signal, they increase communication between
nerve cells in regions of the brain linked to ADHD. The three basic catego-
ries of drugs approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for use with
adults who have ADHD—stimulants, nonstimulants, and alpha-2 hypertension
drugs—boost your mind’s ability to respond to whatever is going on in your
day. They don’t all work the same way, but the end result is that they manage
the symptoms of ADHD effectively in most cases.

118 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
The beauty of what we know about how
the medications work is that it proves they are
not simply masking or covering up the symp-
toms of ADHD, and it confirms our knowl-
edge about the functioning of the brain regions
involved and its connection to these symp-
toms. These medicines are not “Band-Aids,”
“billy clubs,” “chemical straitjackets,” or merely
“mother’s little helpers,” as some critics in the
popular media have contended. While active in
your body, they correct or compensate for the bio-
logical problem at the bottom of ADHD.
If you’ve been exposed to claims that these
medications just cover up what’s wrong, you
might have doubts about trying them. I hope
this chapter will eliminate your concerns. Opting not to use medication to mas-
ter your ADHD, for whatever reason, means denying yourself the most effective
treatment currently available. It’s like a diabetic choosing not to use insulin but
instead trying to deal with the diabetes strictly through diet and more exercise.
Maybe that will work, but it’s less likely to do so and will result in far less control
of the disorder than using medication to manage it. Why would you deny yourself
the equivalent of insulin for a diabetic?
The effectiveness of medication doesn’t mean it’s the only treatment avail-
able. If your symptoms are mild, you may get what you need from the strategies
and tools in Steps Four and Five or from a special form of cognitive-behavioral
therapy that targets your executive function deficits. Coaching might be of great
benefit. Support groups could provide you with shared ideas and inspiration. But
if your symptoms are moderate to severe, medication can alleviate a lot of your
struggles and allow you to get much more out of the nonmedication help available.

therapy that targets your executive function deficits. Coaching might be of great
benefit. Support groups could provide you with shared ideas and inspiration. But
if your symptoms are moderate to severe, medication can alleviate a lot of your
struggles and allow you to get much more out of the nonmedication help available.
Also, if being evaluated for ADHD has revealed that you have more than
one disorder to deal with, you could benefit from medications that can address
all your problems. Studies have shown that sometimes anxiety and depression are
caused by the difficulties of living with ADHD and that when ADHD symptoms
are alleviated through medication, anxiety and depression recede.
As with most conditions, mental or physical, the symptoms occur along a
continuum from mildest to most severe. This is why diagnostic criteria are impor-
tant. Health professionals do not want to treat people unnecessarily. If you have
some symptoms, but not enough to meet the DSM criteria, and you are experienc-
ing impairment in certain major life activities, you will be said to have subclini-
cal ADHD, sometimes called ADHD NOS (NOS = not otherwise specified). In
that case medication may or may not be prescribed, even if ADHD medication was
Check the resources starting
on page 278 for updates on how
the ADHD medications work
within the brain, right down to
how the medications affect
the functioning of nerve cells.
We’re learning more every day.
Studies in molecular genetics
also help explain and predict the
improvements you’re likely to
experience from these medicines.


Medication 119
prescribed for you when you were a child. Even so, if impairment exists, ask for the
medicine even if you are a symptom or two shy of the diagnosis.
If your attitude about trying medication is tied up with emotions and self-
image, a therapist or other counselor may be able to help you examine whether
these issues should factor into your treatment decisions. In the meantime, keep
asking yourself this essential question:
In my book ADHD in Adults: What the Science Says, my coauthors and I compared
adults with ADHD who had been diagnosed as children with those who had been
diagnosed as adults. We looked at the data collected in our Milwaukee study, which
followed children from the late 1970s into adulthood in the new millennium, and also
the data collected in a University of Massachusetts Medical Center study of adults.
• 
We found remarkable similarities between the two groups. The evidence
showed that at least half of the children diagnosed with ADHD still met the cri-
teria for the disorder as adults.
• 
Those diagnosed as adults tended to be less impaired than those diagnosed as
children and followed to adulthood.
• 
But 85% of those diagnosed as adults were more likely to have other disorders
too, particularly anxiety and depression. Why? We don’t know for sure, but it
could be that anxiety and depression were the result of having struggled with
ADHD symptoms for years without treatment.
• 
Those diagnosed as kids had greater problems with educational and occupa-
tional performance, and a substantial minority had more antisocial behavior and
drug use. Again, why? Perhaps these individuals were diagnosed early in life
because their impairments were more noticeable, suggesting their symptoms
may have been more severe than the symptoms of those who made it through
to adulthood before getting diagnosed.

tional performance, and a substantial minority had more antisocial behavior and
drug use. Again, why? Perhaps these individuals were diagnosed early in life
because their impairments were more noticeable, suggesting their symptoms
may have been more severe than the symptoms of those who made it through
to adulthood before getting diagnosed.
What this means regarding medication for adults with ADHD:
• 
If you were diagnosed recently, you may need other medications besides those
for ADHD to ensure that you get help for anxiety or depression along with ADHD.
• 
If you were diagnosed as a child, you may need ADHD medication again if your
symptoms are moderate to severe and you are experiencing impairment in one
or more major life activities.

120 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
“Do I deserve to have a tougher life than other people just because I was
born with a biological predisposition to ADHD?”
I don’t know too many people whose answer would be “yes.”
What Medication Choices Do I Have?
Many. The medications proven effective for treating ADHD fall into three groups:
the stimulants (methylphenidate, amphetamine), the nonstimulants (atomoxetine
and viloxazine), and the alpha-2 antihypertensive medicines guanfacine XR (XR
means “extended release”) and clonidine XR. The information that follows should
help you understand the recommendations your doctor might make. It will also
help you make the treatment decisions that are right for you.
You probably have lots of questions—about how to take the medications,
about their safety and effectiveness, about any side effects that you should expect,
and more. Fortunately, thousands of adults with ADHD before you have asked
the same questions. And physicians and therapists all over the world have had
decades of experience in answering them. Chapters 13 and 14—and Chapter 15,
which tells you what to expect from a course of treatment from beginning to
end—give you the benefit of that experience.
If you’ve never taken medication for ADHD, do you have doubts about start-
ing?
• Maybe you’ve just been diagnosed, and treatment options never
entered your mind before now.
• Maybe being handed a prescription would make the disorder all too
real for you, and you’re not quite ready to own ADHD, as discussed
in Chapter 11.
• Are you afraid of becoming “dependent” on a drug?
• Do you subscribe to the notion that not managing your symptoms on
your own is a sign of weakness?

Medication 121
The table here sums up the medications currently available and FDA
approved for adult ADHD, the forms they come in, and how long their effects last
after a dose. This is a handy reference you might end up coming back to again
and again.
Generic name
(brand name) Duration of activity How supplied
MPH (Ritalin)
a 
3–4 hours Tablets (5, 10, 20 mg)
d-MPH (Focalin)
a 
3–4 hours Tablets (2.5, 5, 10 mg; 2.5 mg
Focalin equivalent to 5 mg Ritalin)
MPH (Methylin)
a 
3–4 hours Tablets (5, 10, 20 mg)
MPH SR (Ritalin SR)
a 
3–8 hours (variable) Tablets (20 mg; amount
absorbed appears to vary)
(cont.)
My Position on ADHD Medications
• ADHD is a disabling condition that arises from neurological and genetic
factors and causes problems in every area of life. Using a medication to
manage a neurogenetic disorder is perfectly reasonable and not just a
means of covering up the “real” social or personal causes of your symp-
toms. ADHD does not arise from social factors or mere personal choices.

• ADHD is a disabling condition that arises from neurological and genetic
factors and causes problems in every area of life. Using a medication to
manage a neurogenetic disorder is perfectly reasonable and not just a
means of covering up the “real” social or personal causes of your symp-
toms. ADHD does not arise from social factors or mere personal choices.
You deserve to reap the benefits of any treatment proven to help.
• You should not be prescribed medication for ADHD without a firm diag-
nosis following a thorough evaluation by a qualified mental health profes-
sional.
• Myths about ADHD medications abound. Quantity does not equal qual-
ity. You can and should get the facts from your doctor and other reliable
sources (see Chapter 11).
• No prescription treatment is etched in stone. You can try a different medi-
cation or stop medication altogether if it proves ineffective or produces
intolerable side effects.
• Medication should always be prescribed as a collaborative effort between
you and your physician.

122 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
Generic name
(brand name) Duration of activity How supplied
MPH (Metadate ER)
a 
3–8 hours (variable) Tablets (10, 20 mg; amount
absorbed appears to vary)
MPH (Methylin ER)
a 
8 hours Tablets (10, 20 mg); chewable
tablets (2.5, 5, 10 mg); oral
solution (5 mg/5 ml, 10 mg/5 ml)
MPH (Ritalin LA)
a 
8 hours Capsules (20, 30, 40 mg; can be
sprinkled)
MPH (Metadate CD)
a 
8 hours Capsules (20 mg; can be
sprinkled)
MPH (Concerta)
a 
12 hours Caplets (18, 27, 36, 54 mg)
d-MPH XR (Focalin XR)
a,c 
12 hours Capsules (10, 20, 30 mg)
AMP (Dexedrine)
b 
4–5 hours Tablets (5 mg)
AMP (Dextrostat)
b 
4–5 hours Tablets (5, 10 mg)
AMP (Dexedrine
Spansules)
b
8 hours Capsules (5, 10, 15 mg)
Mixed salts of AMP
(Adderall)
b
4–6 hours Tablets (5, 7.5, 10, 12.5, 15, 20,
30 mg)
Mixed salts of AMP
(Adderall XR)
a,c
At least 8 hours (but
appears to last much
longer in certain patients)
Capsules (5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30 mg;
can be sprinkled)
lisdexamfetamine
dimesylate (Vyvanse)
c
At least 8 hours (but
appears to last much
longer in certain patients)
Capsules (20, 30, 40, 50, 60,
70 mg)
atomoxetine 
(Strattera)
a,c 
8–10 hours or more
(5-hour plasma half-
life but much longer in
central nervous system)
Capsules (10, 18, 25, 40, 60,
80 mg)
viloxazine (Qelbree) At least 8–9 hours
(7-hour half-life)
Capsules (100, 150, 200 mg)
guanfacine XR (Intuniv)
a,c 
24 hours Tablets (1, 2, 3, 4 mg)
clonidine XR (Kapvay) 24 hours Tablets (1 mg)
Note. MPH: methylphenidate; AMP: amphetamine.
a
Approved to treat ADHD in patients age 6 years and older.
b
Approved to treat ADHD in patients age 3 years and older.
c
Specifically approved for treatment of ADHD in adults.

123
13
The Stimulants
The stimulants are the ADHD medications you’re most likely to have heard of.
They’ve been around longest and are used for both kids and adults. If you were
diagnosed as a child, a stimulant might have been recommended as part of your
treatment years ago. Stimulants are also the most controversial medications for
ADHD. That is because unlike the nonstimulants, they are classified as Schedule
II (potentially addictive) medications by the Drug Enforcement Administration.
Despite that classification, when they are taken orally as prescribed for ADHD
the risk for addiction is low to nonsignificant. Myths as well as realistic concerns
appear regularly in the news, however, and fly about the Internet pretty constantly.

II (potentially addictive) medications by the Drug Enforcement Administration.
Despite that classification, when they are taken orally as prescribed for ADHD
the risk for addiction is low to nonsignificant. Myths as well as realistic concerns
appear regularly in the news, however, and fly about the Internet pretty constantly.
This chapter will:
✓ Sort fact from fiction
✓ Give you an idea of whether a stimulant might help you
✓ Answer the questions typically raised about these medications by adults
with ADHD
The Stimulants: Pros and Cons
The Pros: The stimulants increase inhibition, resistance to distraction, and
the capacity to sustain attention while holding in mind what you are sup-
posed to be doing or planning to do. They increase motor timing and coordi-
nation as well as emotional self-control. As a result, they reduce the adverse
impact these and other ADHD symptoms have on various domains of our
major life activities. With the new sustained-release forms of these medi-
cines, these positive benefits can last for 8–12 hours instead of the 3–5 that
are typical with immediate-release forms.

124 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
How Do Stimulants Help?
Two basic types of stimulants are currently marketed in the United States: methyl-
phenidate (MPH) and amphetamine (AMP). But they come in a variety of deliv-
ery systems that determine how long they will remain in the body and actively
controlling ADHD symptoms.
Generic name Brand name Generic name Brand name
Methylphenidate Ritalin Amphetamine Dexedrine
Focalin Dextrostat
Methylin Adderall
Metadate Vyvanse
Concerta
Note. A third stimulant, pemoline (brand name Cylert), was available for nearly 30 years but was
discontinued due to rare but significant risks for liver damage.
The stimulants help ease ADHD symptoms by increasing the availability
of several neurochemicals that carry self-control-boosting messages in the brain,
especially dopamine. To be available as messengers, the neurochemicals have to
be available in the spaces between nerve cells. Think of them as the water in a
system of canals. The amphetamines mainly increase the amount of dopamine
(and, to a lesser extent, norepinephrine) produced and expressed by the nerve
cells so that more ends up in those spaces. Their effect in the brain is like opening
a gate to let the water rush out into the canal. Methylphenidate works differently,
The Cons: Some people experience problems with insomnia, loss of appe-
tite, stomachaches, and headaches with these medications. Others feel
somewhat tense, as if they have had too much caffeine, for instance. A
small percentage of cases report increased anxiety, tics, or other nervous
mannerisms, especially if these were problems that existed before starting
medications. The medicines cannot be taken 24 hours a day, so they can
leave some times of the day uncovered or with too little medication for it
to be effective, such as late evening hours if the medicine was taken in the
morning.

mannerisms, especially if these were problems that existed before starting
medications. The medicines cannot be taken 24 hours a day, so they can
leave some times of the day uncovered or with too little medication for it
to be effective, such as late evening hours if the medicine was taken in the
morning.

The Stimulants 125
by mainly decreasing the amount of dopamine that is reabsorbed into the nerve
cell after being released—it keeps the lock closed so that the water (neurochemi-
cal) level remains high in the canal once it has been released there.
Why wouldn’t an ADHD medicine like the stimulants make me even
more antsy than I already am?
The term stimulant is misleading. Stimulant medications like methylphenidate
(Ritalin and the like) do make people without ADHD more alert and awake;
?
Why are the stimulants frequently abused? In those who have typical levels of
dopamine in the brain, the boost afforded by the stimulants provides a pleasant
sensation of “speediness.” But that’s not all. The stimulants increase dopamine
in the regions of the brain known to increase the likelihood of drug addiction
(the reward center, or nucleus acumbens)—some of the same regions where
the drugs do so much good for people with ADHD. This activates the brain’s
reward centers, determining how pleasurable or reinforcing certain stimuli will
be. The increased activity in these centers can result in increased sensations
of euphoria, interest, or other reward-related experiences. These pleasurable
altered states of consciousness are most likely to occur when stimulants are
taken intravenously or snorted into the sinus passages as a powder, allowing
the drug to enter into and then clear from these brain regions rapidly. It is this
rapid alteration in conscious sensations that creates the euphoria or other
pleasurable sensations and seems to determine the addictive properties of a
medicine.
Why don’t adults (or children) with ADHD get hooked on the stimulants? Mainly
because the drugs are taken orally, in pill or capsule form, in relatively low
doses and thus enter and leave the brain very slowly. Most people who abuse
stimulants use higher doses and snort them or inject them into a vein in a solu-
tion, such as the stimulant mixed with water. With those delivery systems the
drugs hit the brain all at once with a much more powerful wallop. Also, when
these medications are used to treat ADHD they are only bringing the dopa-
mine levels up to normal, not raising them rapidly well above normal levels as
they would in someone attempting to abuse the drugs through intranasal or
intravenous use.

126 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
they stimulate activity in the frontal regions of the brain, improving inhibition,
sustained attention, and other executive functions necessary for typical self-
regulation. The reason they don’t make hyperactive kids and adults even more
restless than they already are due to ADHD is that these parts of the brain are
underactive or underreactive in those with ADHD. There’s not enough norepi-
nephrine and dopamine available to send signals between neurons and stimulate
the mind to do what it’s supposed to do—pay attention, sit still, look before leap-
ing, and so forth.
While stimulants can also stimulate the brain to do what it’s supposed to do
in typical adults, the degree of improvement is far less dramatic than in those with
ADHD. This is most likely due to the marked underfunctioning of these brain

the mind to do what it’s supposed to do—pay attention, sit still, look before leap-
ing, and so forth.
While stimulants can also stimulate the brain to do what it’s supposed to do
in typical adults, the degree of improvement is far less dramatic than in those with
ADHD. This is most likely due to the marked underfunctioning of these brain
regions in those with ADHD that is not evident in a typical brain.
Are the Stimulants Safe?
Yes! Very safe. But obviously, the stimulants can be abused by anyone. That’s why
they are classified as Schedule II and potentially addictive controlled substances.
Through this classification the U.S. government puts strict limits on the amounts
of these drugs that manufacturers can produce every year, on how they can be
prescribed, and on how pharmacies store and dispense them. It also means if you
decide to try them, you need to take responsibility for keeping them locked up in
a safe place where no one but you can get them.
But what about the potential danger to you? You may have heard a couple of
different myths about the stimulants. It’s time to set the story straight:
Do the Stimulants Lead to Abuse of Other Drugs?
You may have heard claims that these drugs increase the sensitivity to or risk for
abusing other drugs, especially other stimulants. The vast majority of research
does not support this claim. More than 16 studies have examined this issue, many,
like my own, having followed children with ADHD treated with stimulants for
months or years into adulthood. They did not find any increase in risk for later
drug abuse. Evidence for claims that these drugs can sensitize the brain, mak-
ing later exposure to stimulants more powerful and potentially addicting, comes
only from studies of animals in which the drugs were given intravenously, injected
directly into the brain, or given in much higher doses than is the case when treat-
ing children or adults with ADHD. So, the evidence to date does not support any
claims that using stimulants as prescribed for managing ADHD contributes to the
risk of abusing these or other drugs now or later in life.

The Stimulants 127
Do the Stimulants Cause Heart Attacks or Strokes?
You may have heard that these drugs can increase the risk of sudden death, usu-
ally from heart block, and that people taking stimulants have, even more rarely,
suffered strokes. Sudden deaths that occur when the heart stops beating have all
been traced to other factors, like a history of struc-
tural heart defects along with vigorous exercise right
before the death or a family (genetic) history of sud-
den death. These factors alone can account for sud-
den death. The available evidence actually shows
that people on stimulants have a somewhat lower
likelihood of sudden death than the general popula-
tion. This is probably because physicians routinely
screen for heart problems before prescribing stimu-
lants and don’t use them for anyone with a family
history of sudden death or a personal history of structural heart abnormalities,
major arrhythmias, other major cardiac problems, or even high blood pressure.
This means that those at greatest cardiac risk with stimulants usually don’t end up
with this prescription. This could be why the risk ends up lower than in the gen-
eral population.
Research shows that sudden death occurs in one to three of 100,000 peo-
ple taking stimulants for ADHD every year, versus one to seven out of every

This means that those at greatest cardiac risk with stimulants usually don’t end up
with this prescription. This could be why the risk ends up lower than in the gen-
eral population.
Research shows that sudden death occurs in one to three of 100,000 peo-
ple taking stimulants for ADHD every year, versus one to seven out of every
100,000 in the general population. So the rate of sudden death in those tak-
ing stimulants is not significantly higher than that for the general population
that is not taking stimulants. In fact, it was somewhat lower in this research.
That’s because people about to take a stimulant prescription get a physical
exam and screen for possible cardiac problems. When cardiac problems are
detected, they are typically not prescribed stimulants. This is not the case
for the general population, which is not being routinely screened for heart
problems.
How long can I continue to take a stimulant without any long-term
negative effects?
As far as we know, you can take it for as many years as you may need to manage
your symptoms and reduce related impairments.
The stimulants increase heart
rate and blood pressure, but only
as much as climbing a half flight
of stairs. There’s no evidence that
they cause high blood pressure in
those who didn’t already have it.
?

128 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
Is there any scientific evidence to suggest that Ritalin or other stimulant
medication is either safe or unsafe during pregnancy?
There is now a small amount of evidence concerning the effects of ADHD medica-
tions on pregnant mothers or their babies, but no evidence of major abnormalities
in babies born to mothers who stayed on their ADHD medication. There is some
research showing that small amounts of amphetamine may enter the mother’s
breast milk and thus her newborn if she is breastfeeding, but not enough to harm
the infant. This does not seem to occur with methylphenidate (Ritalin and the
like). But because the amount of available evidence is still small, at this time all
companies recommend that women discontinue their ADHD medications should
they become pregnant. Keep in mind that this advice is based to some extent on
companies wishing to limit their liability, not just on the prevailing evidence.
There are numerous risks to coming off medication and allowing one’s
ADHD to go back to its high, unmanaged levels, including an increase in the
risk of accidental injuries, car crashes, abuse of other drugs, suicide, earlier death
(from those risks), and overeating, as well as greater loss of emotional control and
adverse effects on parenting. These risks must be weighed against any hypotheti-
cal risk to the baby from a parent continuing on medication while pregnant.
What Side Effects Can I Expect?
These are the most common side effects adults experience when taking a stimu-
lant, from most to least common:
✓ Insomnia
✓ Loss of appetite
✓ Weight loss
✓ Headaches
✓ Nausea, upset stomach, or stomachache
✓ Anxiety
✓ Irritability
✓ Motor tics
✓ Increased muscle tension
?

What Side Effects Can I Expect?
These are the most common side effects adults experience when taking a stimu-
lant, from most to least common:
✓ Insomnia
✓ Loss of appetite
✓ Weight loss
✓ Headaches
✓ Nausea, upset stomach, or stomachache
✓ Anxiety
✓ Irritability
✓ Motor tics
✓ Increased muscle tension
?

The Stimulants 129
You can find a simple list like this in the package insert that comes with your
prescription. That doesn’t tell you much about the impact you can really expect
the stimulants to have on your daily life. These firsthand reports illustrate both
what you might experience and how to counteract any negative effects:
“I had never been treated for my ADHD before, always believing that the symptoms
were really just a reflection of my own personal failings or lack of self-discipline.
But when my doctor started me on a stimulant for my ADHD, the results amazed
me. I actually could remember multiple things in my mind that I needed to do
without losing them to the nearest distractions. And I was able to persist at work
I usually found boring far longer than before, which meant I was much more
productive at getting things done, and done more quickly and efficiently, because I
could focus better on the tasks at hand. I know it sounds weird, but I could actu-
ally see things more clearly—not so much things around me, but the ideas I was
holding in my mind about what I wanted to do were more clear, less jumbled and
disorganized, and more likely to lead me to get them done.
“I did have less of an appetite, particularly for midday meals, but I had been
meaning to drop a few pounds anyway, so that was no big deal. And I did find
myself staying up a little later at night before falling asleep, but not so much that it
affected me the next day. Overall, being treated for my ADHD has literally saved
my job and my marriage. At times I still need some help with structuring my work
late in the day, especially when the medicine may be wearing off. But on balance
this treatment has helped me turn my life around.”
“I took Ritalin in second and third grade, and it made me really jittery and nervous.
I didn’t want to go to school for a long time. I felt a little calmer once the doctor
took me off it. But then I didn’t want to go to school because I couldn’t sit still and
concentrate! I still have anxiety today, so I wasn’t too eager to take the Adderall
my doctor suggested recently. But she prescribed an antianxiety drug along with
the Adderall, and they’ve worked great for me.”
The research is somewhat mixed on whether stimulants worsen anxiety, but
enough studies have found this to be the case (though more with children
than adults and more with amphetamines than methylphenidate) that you
should be aware of this possible adverse effect. If you are concerned about
anxiety, the nonstimulants might be a better choice (see Chapter 14).

The research is somewhat mixed on whether stimulants worsen anxiety, but
enough studies have found this to be the case (though more with children
than adults and more with amphetamines than methylphenidate) that you
should be aware of this possible adverse effect. If you are concerned about
anxiety, the nonstimulants might be a better choice (see Chapter 14).

130 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
“Yeah, sometimes I have a really hard time falling asleep at night. But I drink
warm milk, and a friend taught me deep breathing and progressive relaxation,
and that often helps. On an up note, I’ve lost that 10 pounds I could never shed:
these days I never seem to want lunch, maybe because the stimulant is at its
peak in my system then, and I think I’m just eating the right number of calories
now.”
“When my brother started taking a stimulant, he said all of a sudden he was snap-
ping at people and losing his temper all the time. His doctor reduced the dosage,
and he felt better, although he didn’t get the same amount of help with his ADHD
symptoms that way. But when I took the same medicine, I felt pretty calm, like I
could control my emotions for the first time in I don’t know how long.”
In rare cases, stimulants make people more irritable or angry, most often
later in the day when the medicine might be wearing off. A few report feel-
ings of mild sadness or emotional sensitivity that can make them prone to
tearfulness. But such effects are rare and dissipate within hours of discon-
tinuing the medicine. Whether stimulants are likely to make you feel this way
may depend on your own personality, what other disorders you may have
along with your ADHD, and which of your executive functions have been
affected most by ADHD. If you had a lot of trouble controlling your emotions
in the past, and you haven’t been diagnosed with a problem like depression
in addition to ADHD, the stimulants may actually improve your emotional
self-control. Emotion regulation is one of the executive functions weakened
by ADHD and improved by medication treatment.
“When they first started working, these medications made me feel like my whole
body was tense—like I might be clenching my jaw and grinding my teeth—and
I was always on the verge of a headache. Sometimes my back felt really tight too.
It was like I’d had four cups of coffee instead of my usual one or two. My doctor
reduced my dosage slightly. Also, now I go to the gym and work out, which makes
me at least feel more relaxed before I get home from work. My wife says I’ve not
only trimmed down but bulked up my muscles too.”

The Stimulants 131
This medicine really helps my ADHD symptoms, but it makes me really
nauseated. What can I do?
This can happen if you take the medicine on an empty stomach, so try eating
something before you take your medication. If the problem continues, speak with
your doctor about reducing the dose, changing the time you take the dose, or
switching to another medication.
Can I drink alcohol or take other drugs when I am on a stimulant for
ADHD management?
Yes, but you should do so in moderation. The only drugs you should avoid, of
course, are other stimulants, such as cocaine, methamphetamine, crack, or another
prescription stimulant, as this just increases the effect of the other stimulant on
your body. But caffeine and alcohol do not interact adversely with the stimulants.
Nicotine can act as a stimulant, compounding the effects of your ADHD medi-

course, are other stimulants, such as cocaine, methamphetamine, crack, or another
prescription stimulant, as this just increases the effect of the other stimulant on
your body. But caffeine and alcohol do not interact adversely with the stimulants.
Nicotine can act as a stimulant, compounding the effects of your ADHD medi-
cines on your heart rate and blood pressure. Please discuss this with your doctor
if you are a smoker.
?
?
Actual increases in muscle tension are not common side effects of stimulant
treatment. More often it is a subjective feeling of tenseness but even that is
uncommon. Yet some people do experience them, especially if they are taking
higher-than-typical doses. This is more likely to happen on an amphetamine
than on methylphenidate. Unless you have a family history of tic disorders or
previously had them yourself, the stimulants are unlikely to cause motor tics.
If you have a family or personal history, you might develop them while on
stimulants. Up to a third of those who already have tics will see them worsen.
But another third found no increase in tics, and a third of those who had a tic
disorder previously have actually reported some improvement. Therefore, a
personal or family history of tic disorders should not preclude trying a stimu-
lant—you only need to be extra vigilant about monitoring for the occurrence of
tics to evaluate how the drug may be affecting them.

132 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
What Are My Choices?
The stimulants come in different forms or delivery
systems: pills (tablets), pumps (capsules), pellets (cap-
sules and caplets), patches, and pro-drug (capsules).
For children, there are also delayed activation, liq-
uid, and oral dissolving (gummy) formulations.
Pills
These are the origi-
nal versions of these
medicines, and they’ve been
available for many decades. The
first versions of amphetamine
were developed in the 1930s,
while the first version of methyl-
phenidate was created in the
1950s. In pill form, these medi-
cations are absorbed quickly,
usually within 15–20 minutes
after being taken by mouth and swallowed. They can usually
reach their peak level in the blood (and so in the brain) in
60–90 minutes and may control the symptoms of ADHD for
3–5 hours. That’s their main problem. If you want to control
the symptoms of ADHD for the typical 14- to 16-hour adult
day, you have to take these medications two to four times a day
or even more often.
The Pump
Then came the invention of an ingenious water-based
(osmotic) pump system for delivering these drugs into the
body and keeping them in the bloodstream longer. The
brand name for this system is Concerta, and it delivers meth-
ylphenidate. It’s a container that looks like a capsule, with a
small laser-drilled hole on one of its long ends. Inside are two
chambers. One chamber contains a paste-like sludge of
methylphenidate, and the other chamber is empty. There is
also a powdered form of methylphenidate that coats the out-
side of the capsule. Now here is the neat part: When you
Your choice of drug form will
depend largely on what matters to
you, like how long your active day
is and when you need to be on top
of your game. All of these delivery
systems have been proven safe and
effective in hundreds of studies.
Pro: Rapid activation,
short duration of
action (when the drug
is needed for just a
short time)
Con: Need to remember
to take the next dose
several times a day—

you, like how long your active day
is and when you need to be on top
of your game. All of these delivery
systems have been proven safe and
effective in hundreds of studies.
Pro: Rapid activation,
short duration of
action (when the drug
is needed for just a
short time)
Con: Need to remember
to take the next dose
several times a day—
probably not one of
your strengths.
Pros:
• 8–12 hours of symptom
control from one dose
• Possibly the best
time-release form of
methylphenidate if
you need to be at peak
performance in the
afternoon
Look for these brand names
for stimulants in pill form:
•
 
Ritalin (MPH, a mixture of
d-MPH and l-MPH)
•
 
Focalin (just d-MPH)
•
 
Dexedrine (d-AMP)
•
 
Adderall and Evekeo are
both mixtures of l- and
d-AMP.


The Stimulants 133
swallow the capsule, the powder goes right to work just as it would in the pill form.
That gets some medication into the bloodstream quickly and gives the capsule just
enough time to start to absorb water from your stomach (and later your intestines).
The water is absorbed through the wall of the pump in a continuous, even flow
into that empty chamber. As that chamber fills up, it presses against the chamber
containing the methylphenidate paste and squeezes it out of the hole in the cap-
sule continuously for 8–12 hours or more. The end result is that many people,
especially children, need to take only one capsule a
day and not the usual two to three (or more) they
would have to take using the regular pills.
The capsules come in various doses, of course, so
your doctor can adjust the dose to suit your individual
needs and responses. One problem, though, is that
some adults in particular may need a longer course of
medication each day than what the capsule provides.
To deal with that issue, some physicians prescribe the
immediate-release pill form of methylphenidate or
amphetamine toward the end of the day to provide an
extra 3–5 hours of treatment with medication when the Concerta may be losing its
beneficial control of ADHD symptoms. Even so, you just have to love the human
ingenuity that led to the discovery of this delivery system.
The Pellets
At around the same time as the water-pump method
was being invented, engineers were modifying a
method that uses time-release pellets to keep medi-
cines in the body and bloodstream longer than the
pills. This method had been used for years with some
cold medicines but had to be modified in various
ways for use with methylphenidate and amphet-
amine. Now we have time-release pellets for both of
these stimulants. Little beads of the drug are coated in such a way that some dis-
solve immediately after being swallowed, while
others dissolve 1, 2, 3, or more hours later so that
the drug can be absorbed more gradually into the
bloodstream across 8–10 hours for most people.
This ingenious delivery system has the added
advantage that anyone who simply cannot or does
not want to swallow the capsule containing these
pellets can open the capsule (pull it apart), sprinkle
Cons:
• A standard pill may need to
be added to extend symptom
control to a full adult day
• Not easy to adjust the dose
due to limited capsule sizes
Look for these stimulant
brand names in pellet form:
•

not want to swallow the capsule containing these
pellets can open the capsule (pull it apart), sprinkle
Cons:
• A standard pill may need to
be added to extend symptom
control to a full adult day
• Not easy to adjust the dose
due to limited capsule sizes
Look for these stimulant
brand names in pellet form:
•
 
Ritalin LA (MPH)
•
 
Focalin XR (d-MPH)
•
 
Metadate CD (MPH)
•
 
Adderall XR (AMP)

Pros:
• Great for those who can’t (or
don’t want to) swallow a capsule
• May be best for you if you need
to be at your peak in the morning

134 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
the contents on a teaspoon of applesauce, yogurt, or other food, and swallow it
that way. It does not change the way the drug will work in the body.
Again, there are different sizes (doses) of these capsules to
permit your physician to adjust the dose to its optimum level for
you. Like the water-pump method, these time-release pellet sys-
tems sometimes have to be supplemented late in the day with a
regular or immediate-release pill version of the same drug if you
need longer symptom control than what these systems can pro-
vide into the evening hours. Some research shows that this pellet
system provides a little better control of ADHD symptoms in the
morning than the afternoon hours, while the pump system provides a bit better
control in the afternoon.
The Patch
The next invention of a delivery system for the stimulants
was approved by the FDA in 2007. It is a patch with an
adhesive coating that is applied directly to the skin, such as
on the back of your shoulder or
on the buttocks. The patch,
which goes by the brand name Daytrana, contains
methylphenidate. When applied this way, the methyl-
phenidate is absorbed through the skin and gets into the
bloodstream by that means. So long as you wear the
patch, methylphenidate is being delivered to your blood-
stream—for as many hours during the day as you want.
As with the other drug forms, the patch comes in differ-
ent doses so you can take the amount that’s best for you.
The Pro-Drug
In 2008, another delivery system received FDA approval for use by adults with
ADHD, and that system goes by the brand name of Vyvanse (an amphetamine).
Here is yet another example of human inventiveness.
One of the problems with the immediate-release pills as
well as the pellet systems is that they have the potential to be
abused, usually by crushing and inhaling the powder from the
pills or the beads from the pellet systems or by mixing the pow-
der with water and injecting it into a vein. This problem led a
small biotech company to invent a method in which the amphet-
amine cannot be activated unless it is in the human stomach or
Con: The pill may be
needed to extend
symptom control
into the evening.
Pros:
• Symptom control for as
long a day as you want
• Nothing to swallow
Cons:
• Needs to be removed
several hours before
bedtime to prevent insomnia
• Causes skin rash at patch
site in 15–20% of people
Pros:
• Little or no
potential for abuse
• Full day of
symptom control

symptom control
into the evening.
Pros:
• Symptom control for as
long a day as you want
• Nothing to swallow
Cons:
• Needs to be removed
several hours before
bedtime to prevent insomnia
• Causes skin rash at patch
site in 15–20% of people
Pros:
• Little or no
potential for abuse
• Full day of
symptom control

The Stimulants 135
intestines. They achieved this by bonding a lysine compound to
the dextroamphetamine d-AMP so that it locked up the amphet-
amine so it could not activate without removing the lysine “lock.”
This bonding of an active drug to another compound that alters
its typical pattern of activation creates a type of medication called
a pro-drug by the FDA. Once the pro-drug is swallowed, a chemi-
cal that occurs naturally in the stomach and intestines (and prob-
ably the blood in the intestinal lining) splits the lysine from the d-AMP, allowing
the d-AMP to go to work. Typically, the effects of the d-AMP last 10–14 hours.
What’s on the Horizon
Although not yet approved for ADHD in adults, a new delivery system became
available in June 2019 for use by children and teens with ADHD. It uses meth-
ylphenidate but binds it into a unique delivery system that creates a delay in the
activation of the medication (brand name Jornay PM). Children take the medi-
cine at 9:00 
P.M., and the drug activates reliably about 9 hours later. This form was
invented to get around the fact that other forms of stimulants can leave children
unmedicated at one of the most stressful times of the day for both parent and
child, early morning on school days. The company plans to launch an amphet-
amine version of this delayed-release system and hopes to obtain FDA approval of
both medicines for use with adults who have ADHD.
Other companies are experimenting with a combination of a stimulant
(amphetamine) and a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (NERI) similar to atom-
oxetine to see if they can achieve better control of a wider array of ADHD symp-
toms than occurs from either drug type alone. And still others are studying even
more specific NERI medicines for their effectiveness for ADHD. I also expect to
see even more medicines being developed to target the aspects of brain function-
ing adversely affected by the genes we are now finding contribute to ADHD.
Can the generics really be as different as they seemed in my case? The
pharmacy I go to switched to generic versions of Ritalin, and the new
generic did not work nearly as well. My doctor switched me to the brand-
name drug, but do I really need to spend the extra money?
Your doctor was correct to believe there can be a significant difference. The
generic medications appear not to be manufactured with the same degree of rigor
as the brand-name medications. The generics have been associated with numer-
ous reports of greater variability in controlling symptoms on a day-to-day basis
and less success overall in managing symptoms. Should that occur, ask to be
transferred back to the brand-name medicine.
?
Con: May last
longer than desired
when only a short
duration is wanted

as the brand-name medications. The generics have been associated with numer-
ous reports of greater variability in controlling symptoms on a day-to-day basis
and less success overall in managing symptoms. Should that occur, ask to be
transferred back to the brand-name medicine.
?
Con: May last
longer than desired
when only a short
duration is wanted

136 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
Should I change medication every time a new drug comes out, even
though my current medication seems to work fine? If I don’t try the new
medications, whose advertising promises great new benefits, will I be
missing out?
Generally, it’s not a good idea to chase the latest drug if the one you are taking is
successfully managing your ADHD symptoms. However, if side effects are annoy-
ing and your doctor believes the newer medication may be less likely to cause
problems, it may be worth switching drugs or delivery systems. For instance, some
adults report that Adderall XR’s faster and more subjectively detectable onset of
action may be associated with feelings of increased inner tension. Switching to
Vyvanse has helped them with a smoother onset and offset of their medication’s
effects. Both are amphetamines, yet the delivery system for Vyvanse seems to
make a difference in how rapidly the dose is felt.
What do I do if I forget to take my medicine?
As long as it’s not past 1:00 or 2:00 
P.M., you can probably take the drug without
much impact on your sleep. If you have forgotten for the day, just take it the next
day. There appear to be no problems with abrupt cessation of the stimulants, most
likely because they wash out of your body within 24 hours in most cases when
taken as prescribed.
Is it possible to build tolerance to stimulant medicines? If so, how do I
avoid this, or how do I handle it once I’m experiencing it?
Actual physical tolerance seems unlikely with the current ADHD medications, but
some individuals report that their medication seems less effective 3–6 months after
starting their treatment. This usually requires adjusting the dose or, sometimes,
changing to a different delivery system or medication. Clinically, we sometimes see
people complaining that their medicine isn’t working as well as before, but further
information shows them going through an unusually stressful or demanding period
in their life that may exacerbate their ADHD symptoms and make it more difficult
for their usual dose to provide adequate treatment. They may need to temporarily
change their dose or address the source of the stress at these times.
Some people adjust their view of themselves once on medication and end up
focusing so strongly on areas where they haven’t experienced improvement that
they start to believe the drug isn’t working. They may need to stop the medicine
for a few days to remind themselves of the positive effects it has had on them—or
to discover whether, in fact, the drug is not doing anything for them.
?
?
?

focusing so strongly on areas where they haven’t experienced improvement that
they start to believe the drug isn’t working. They may need to stop the medicine
for a few days to remind themselves of the positive effects it has had on them—or
to discover whether, in fact, the drug is not doing anything for them.
?
?
?

137
14
The Nonstimulants
When doctors and researchers talk about “the nonstimulants” for ADHD, they
are typically talking about atomoxetine or the alpha-2 antihypertensive medicine
guanfacine XR. You’ll find atomoxetine sold under the brand name Strattera and
guanfacine XR under the name Intuniv.
The FDA approved atomoxetine for the management
of child, teen, and adult ADHD in 2003. It was the first
(and is still the only) nonstimulant approved for the treat-
ment of ADHD in adults. At the time it was the first new
drug approved for ADHD in more than 25 years. Atomox-
etine was studied more than any other ADHD drug before
receiving FDA approval, with randomized double-blind
studies involving more than 6,000 patients worldwide.
Although the stimulants have been used for ADHD much longer, there’s no doubt
that the safety and efficacy of atomoxetine have been well researched.
Atomoxetine (Strattera)
Interestingly, atomoxetine was explored for years as a possible antidepressant.
When its manufacturer abandoned that direction (for reasons unknown to us),
the company shelved the drug but much later began to look at it as a treatment for
ADHD. The drug prevents norepinephrine from being reabsorbed by the nerve
cells once released, thus leaving more of the drug outside the cell to act on other,
nearby nerve cells. This makes it a natural for treating a disorder marked by a
shortage of that chemical messenger. In Chapter 13 you read that the stimulants
target mainly the neurotransmitter dopamine. The fact that atomoxetine targets
primarily norepinephrine means that it has a slightly different effect on ADHD
symptoms. Even so, some research suggests it may indirectly improve dopamine
functioning as well. By affecting a different brain chemical, it may work better
than the stimulants for some people. It all depends on where your particular
See Chapter 11
for a definition of
randomized, controlled,
double-blind trials.


138 CHANGE YOUR BRAIN
ADHD neurological deficits lie. We’re all biologically unique, especially in the
organization and functioning of the brain.
Atomoxetine can be taken once or twice a day, depending on the dosage.
Most adults take the drug once a day. Its effects last most of the day, so there is no
need for an extended-release form for daily coverage, as there is with the stimu-
lants. Most people start by taking the drug in the morning, but if they experience
significant drowsiness or tiredness that lasts longer than a few weeks, it may be
best to take it at night or to split the dose and take it twice daily. It might take
longer for your doctor to arrive at the right dosage for you than it does with the
stimulants, however. Your body will take longer to adjust to the side effects of
drugs like atomoxetine than to the stimulants. So your doctor will probably want
to leave you on a particular dose a bit longer before adjusting it than would be the
case with a stimulant.
I heard that this drug takes longer to work than the stimulants. Is that
so? If so, how long?
Yes, with atomoxetine it can take 2–4 weeks of gradual dose adjustment before

drugs like atomoxetine than to the stimulants. So your doctor will probably want
to leave you on a particular dose a bit longer before adjusting it than would be the
case with a stimulant.
I heard that this drug takes longer to work than the stimulants. Is that
so? If so, how long?
Yes, with atomoxetine it can take 2–4 weeks of gradual dose adjustment before
your doctor finds the best level for you. The dose is adjusted more slowly mainly
because taking a drug like this one that increases norepinephrine can result in
annoying side effects like nausea and drowsiness if the dose is raised too much or
too quickly. Another drug that works like atomoxetine (viloxazine, or Qelbree)
was FDA approved in April 2021 for use with children and may take less time to
adjust to an ideal dose. It may be approved for adults sometime soon. I recommend
that adults just starting atomoxetine be patient. You’ve been dealing with ADHD
for years, so a few weeks to achieve good control of your symptoms is a small price
to pay for the advantages this drug can provide.
How Effective Is Atomoxetine Compared to Stimulants?
• 
On average about 75% of people get positive effects from the stimulants
or the nonstimulants.
• 
Some studies suggest that while 50% of people respond positively to
both types of medications, 25% may respond better to a stimulant than
to atomoxetine, while the remaining 25% may respond better to atomox-
etine than to one of the stimulants.
?

The nonstimulants 139
Is Atomoxetine Safe?
✓ It’s certainly safe in terms of its abuse potential—it has none.
✓ Liver complications occur once in every mil-
lion people treated—one to four cases out of
4.5 million treated at the time this review was
done (it was not clear that the drug caused the
problem in all four cases; more recent evidence
implicates just one case of liver inflammation).
This extremely unusual side effect seems to
result from a very rare autoimmune reaction
Do not take atomoxetine at the
same time as a monoamine
oxydase inhibitor (MAOI)—the
combination can have potentially
life-threatening adverse effects.
Why Atomoxetine Is Rarely Abused . . . and What This
Means to You
Some research shows that by blocking the reuptake of norepinephrine atom-
oxetine also increases the amount of dopamine outside of nerve cells. But
it does so only in certain parts of the brain, such as the frontal cortex. This
means the drug can address dopamine-related ADHD deficits in the brain
without affecting the brain reward centers likely to be related to drug addiction
or abuse. Because it doesn’t have the same stimulant effect as methylpheni-
date and amphetamine, the drug has little appeal as a drug of abuse. In fact,
research shows that people addicted to drugs don’t favor atomoxetine any
more than they do other psychiatric drugs, such as antidepressants—which
is to say very little. This is why it’s called a “nonstimulant” and why it’s not a
controlled substance in the United States.
What does this mean for you?
• 
It’s much more convenient to fill and refill a prescription. Your doctor
can phone in a refill, for example, which can’t be done with the stimu-
lants.
• 
You don’t have to take the same precautions to keep the drug inacces-
sible to everyone else.
• 
This might be the treatment of choice for you if you’ve struggled with
substance abuse of your own. (In fact, one study of adult alcoholics
with ADHD showed that atomoxetine improved ADHD and reduced

• 
You don’t have to take the same precautions to keep the drug inacces-
sible to everyone else.
• 
This might be the treatment of choice for you if you’ve struggled with
substance abuse of your own. (In fact, one study of adult alcoholics
with ADHD showed that atomoxetine improved ADHD and reduced
heavy drinking at the same time.)

140 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
to the drug in which the body’s immune system attacks and inflames the
outer layers of the liver. To be safe, people with a history of liver damage
or other liver problems may want to avoid using this drug.
✓ The package insert for atomoxetine warns of a possible increase in suicidal
thinking from this drug, though not in suicide attempts. It’s important to
note that this risk was not found for teens or adults. Even for children it
remains questionable because the methods by which the information was
collected in the initial clinical trials weren’t entirely sound and the prob-
lem was noted at only one of the 23 sites involved in the study.
✓ Atomoxetine can also increase your heart rate and blood pressure, though
even less so than the stimulants.
The most common side effects of atomoxetine are:
✓ Nausea or vomiting
✓ Dry mouth
✓ Dizziness or light-headedness
✓ Drowsiness
✓ Constipation
✓ Sweating
✓ Decreased libido (sex drive) or erectile dysfunction
✓ Insomnia (far less common than with the stimulants)
✓ Irritability (rare; same as with the stimulants—some people actually
report improvement in their mood or emotional self-control while on this
medication)
I couldn’t handle the insomnia caused by the first stimulant I tried. My
doctor tried me on other stimulants, and I had the same problems. But
I’m not getting nearly as much improvement in my ADHD from Strat-
tera. What else can I do?
This is a very unlikely situation, but it can certainly occur. Try some of the non-
medication options in Steps Four and Five as well as ADHD coaching to see if any
of these help. Some clinicians are combining atomoxetine with a stimulant while
?

The nonstimulants 141
using lower doses of each in cases such as this. Discuss such combinations with
your doctor if you think they might be beneficial for you.
The bottom line? Some studies suggest that atomoxetine may not produce
quite as much improvement in ADHD symptoms as the stimulants. But you might
find you get enough improvement to manage your symptoms and, at the same
time, avoid uncomfortable side effects that can be associated with stimulants.
Can I open the capsule to mix it with food or adjust my dose?
No. Atomoxetine has some acid-like properties that can burn the eye if you get
some of the powder on your fingers and happen to rub your eyes. To adjust your
dose, your doctor can combine various sizes of the capsules to better treat your
ADHD.
Guanfacine XR (Intuniv)
This medication is based on a well-known drug used to manage high blood pres-
sure in adults (guanfacine HCL), which now comes in a newer extended-release
delivery system formulated for use in managing ADHD. To get the benefit of the
extended-release system, you should swallow the tablet whole and not crushed.
Atomoxetine might be a better choice than stimulants if . . .
• You have mild to moderate ADHD and don’t need the most potent
drugs, like amphetamine.
• You’ve tried stimulants without much improvement in your symptoms.
• You found stimulant side effects, notably insomnia, intolerable. Atom-

extended-release system, you should swallow the tablet whole and not crushed.
Atomoxetine might be a better choice than stimulants if . . .
• You have mild to moderate ADHD and don’t need the most potent
drugs, like amphetamine.
• You’ve tried stimulants without much improvement in your symptoms.
• You found stimulant side effects, notably insomnia, intolerable. Atom-
oxetine doesn’t cause sleep problems.
• You or someone in your household has a history of substance abuse.
• You need the therapeutic effects all day long.
• You suffer from anxiety, depression, tics, nervous mannerisms, or
obsessions and compulsions. Atomoxetine doesn’t worsen these
problems; in some cases, tics or anxiety might actually improve.
?

142 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
The drug works reasonably well at managing ADHD symptoms in some patients
but does not appear to be as effective as the stimulants (methylphenidate or
amphetamine) and is perhaps slightly less effective than the nonstimulant atom-
oxetine. Unlike stimulants, which are eliminated from the body daily, guanfacine
XR remains within the body for longer than 24 hours before being metabolized
and eliminated.
The medicine works by an entirely different route in the brain than do the
other ADHD medications. Those change the amount of neurotransmitter avail-
able in the brain at the synapse or gap between nerve cells, as discussed ear-
lier. Guanfacine XR achieves its effects by fine-tuning the transmission of signals
through nerve cells. Each nerve cell has small ports or openings (like sphincters
or valves) along its main channel, or axon. These are called alpha-2 ports, and the
more open they are, the more the nerve signals from that cell can be disrupted or
weakened. Guanfacine XR closes these ports, strengthening signals as they move
along the axon, which makes it easier for each cell to communicate with adjacent
nerve cells, resulting in better functioning.
But because this drug is an antihypertensive, one of its side effects is a reduc-
tion in blood pressure that can lead to a subjective feeling of light-headedness and,
in rare cases, fainting. Like other blood pressure medications, this one can cause
drowsiness or sedation, and compared to a stimulant, it can take longer to adjust
the dosage and find the right amount to get good control of ADHD symptoms.
The most common side effects of guanfacine XR are:
✓ Dizziness and drowsiness, especially when starting
✓ Headache
✓ Irritability
✓ Low blood pressure
✓ Nausea
✓ Stomachache
✓ Dry mouth
✓ Constipation
✓ Reduced appetite
✓ Very low blood pressure (uncommon)
✓ Slow heart rate (uncommon)
✓ Fainting (uncommon)

The nonstimulants 143
The side effects can lessen over time while the drug is being taken. Like
atomoxetine, this drug has no significant effect on brain reward centers and thus
has no significant abuse potential the way the stimulants might. It is often viewed
as a third-line medicine for managing ADHD, given that it is less effective than
the stimulants and greater patience is needed while adjusting the dose to achieve
optimal results. Another drug similar to this type and FDA approved for children
is clonidine XR. It may be approved for adults soon.
Bupropion (Wellbutrin)
Bupropion (brand name Wellbutrin) is a drug devel-
oped as an antidepressant that is sometimes used
to treat adults with ADHD, particularly if they
have associated anxiety or depression. It’s not FDA

optimal results. Another drug similar to this type and FDA approved for children
is clonidine XR. It may be approved for adults soon.
Bupropion (Wellbutrin)
Bupropion (brand name Wellbutrin) is a drug devel-
oped as an antidepressant that is sometimes used
to treat adults with ADHD, particularly if they
have associated anxiety or depression. It’s not FDA
approved for this use and hasn’t been studied as
thoroughly as atomoxetine for treating ADHD. But
the research studies available do indicate significant
benefits in managing the symptoms of ADHD, and
the lack of FDA approval does not prevent doctors
from prescribing it in cases where the medication
might prove a better choice than either the stimu-
lants or atomoxetine—generally when you have been diagnosed with anxiety or
depression in addition to ADHD. Bupropion increases norepinephrine in the brain
in the same way as atomoxetine, but it affects other brain chemicals too, such as
dopamine, by which it may be benefiting ADHD management, and serotonin,
which means it may produce different side effects than other approved ADHD
medications that don’t impact that chemical. If your only diagnosis is ADHD, you
may be better off with either a stimulant or atomoxetine.
Using a medication to treat a
condition for which it is not FDA
approved is called “off-label use”
and can be perfectly safe (and
even the best choice). But always
ask your doctor to explain the
pros and cons and why one drug
is preferred over the alternatives.
Other nonstimulants may be prescribed for you, but not necessarily for ADHD
since none are particularly effective in improving ADHD symptoms. However,
ADHD medications are often combined with drugs used to treat other condi-
tions, such as antidepressants, antianxiety drugs, antihypertensive drugs, and
even some mood stabilizer or antipsychotic drugs.
The antinarcoleptic drug modafinil (brand name Provigil) has shown
some initial promise as a treatment for ADHD symptoms in children, but even

144 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
these results have not always been replicated in other studies. There is also no
research to date on use of the drug for adults with ADHD. The drug increases
wakefulness and arousal and sometimes has been used to treat sleep apnea
(disrupted breathing while asleep). But it has not received FDA approval for
treatment of ADHD as of this writing because there was a rare case of a
severe allergic skin reaction in the initial study submitted to the FDA as part of
its approval process; the FDA has required that the drug be studied further for
certain rare side effects before receiving approval. But the manufacturer, as of
this writing, seems unlikely to invest any more time and money in this approval
process.

145
15
What to Expect
from Treatment
Medications for ADHD, especially the stimulants and atomoxetine, are among
the safest, most effective, and best studied of all drugs used to treat psychiatric
conditions. You have a very good chance—up to 80%—of zeroing in on a course
of treatment that will turn your life around. It might take a little time. Some
experimentation in consultation with your doctor may be needed to arrive at the
best regimen for you. Here’s how you and your doctor will get there:
A Physical Exam and Interview
You may have already covered these steps during your diagnostic evaluation. But
if you were diagnosed a while back and are just considering medication now, your

experimentation in consultation with your doctor may be needed to arrive at the
best regimen for you. Here’s how you and your doctor will get there:
A Physical Exam and Interview
You may have already covered these steps during your diagnostic evaluation. But
if you were diagnosed a while back and are just considering medication now, your
doctor will probably want to cover this ground again. It’s wise to make sure no new
factors that could affect a course of medication have entered the picture.
Your physician will conduct a physical examination with particular attention
to:
✓ Your heart rate
✓ Your blood pressure
✓ Other medications you are taking
Rule out heart problems: If you read Chapters 13
and 14, you know it’s important to identify any heart
problems (either in yourself or in your family history)
before deciding on a stimulant and probably even a nonstimulant. Some physi-
cians may want to do an electrocardiogram (ECG). While not usually necessary,
Once you’ve started medication,
immediately tell your doctor if
you experience any significant
heart functioning problems—
palpitations, rapid heart rate,
chest pain, dizziness, or fainting.

146 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
it’s a fairly inexpensive precaution and not a bad idea if you haven’t had one for
any other reason in a long time.
Identify possible drug interactions: Although these drugs are safe in combina-
tion with most other medications, you want to ensure that you’re not going to end
up taking two stimulant medications at the same time or that you’re not consider-
ing atomoxetine if you’re taking an MAOI. If you smoke, discuss this with your
doctor if he or she is planning on giving you a stimulant. Nicotine can also act as a
stimulant, and the combination of the two can cause increased heart rate or blood
pressure, or other stimulant side effects.
Finding Exactly the Right Medicine
You have about a 75% chance of responding to whatever
ADHD drug is tried first. Don’t be surprised if you feel like
you’re suddenly able to function pretty normally, maybe
for the first time in your life. But if that doesn’t happen,
don’t be discouraged. Lots of other medications, forms, and
dosages are available for you to try and may still work for
you. Overall, you have an 80–90% chance of responding
positively to one of the various ADHD medications on the
market in the United States at this time.
How will the doctor decide what to try first?
Stimulant or Nonstimulant?
This question is faced by every physician in every case of adult ADHD. Some start
with a drug they’ve already been using successfully with a lot of their patients.
Some start with whatever they were trained to use as a first-choice drug. Some
use what their colleagues are already using extensively, especially if they have less
experience than their colleagues.
Most doctors are likely to try a stimulant first if you don’t seem to have
another disorder besides ADHD, or it’s urgent or a priority to get relatively rapid
control over your ADHD (you are about to be fired if your work doesn’t improve,
your spouse or partner plans to leave you if things don’t turn around quickly in
your relationship, you’re about to fail college classes, and so forth). The form cho-
sen for a first trial might be determined by the pros and cons listed in Chapter 13.
But my colleagues and I believe a doctor can home in on what’s best for you by
using more than standard guidelines. The checklist on page 147 will give you an

your relationship, you’re about to fail college classes, and so forth). The form cho-
sen for a first trial might be determined by the pros and cons listed in Chapter 13.
But my colleagues and I believe a doctor can home in on what’s best for you by
using more than standard guidelines. The checklist on page 147 will give you an
idea of whether a stimulant or nonstimulant, like atomoxetine, might be best for
you. You could also pass this list on to your doctor for consideration.
Designing the best possible
treatment plan is as much
art as science. Try to be
patient during the process:
You’re the one who has
everything to gain!

What to expect from Treatment 147
Yes No Issue to consider
☐ ☐ 
1. Have you had an adverse or poor response to stimulants before?
☐ ☐ 
2. Have you never had a prior adverse or poor response to a
noradrenergic agent?
☐ ☐ 
3. Is an immediate medication response not necessary for urgent
management of your ADHD?
☐ ☐ 
4. Do you have problems with anxiety or depression in addition to
ADHD?
☐ ☐ 
5. Do you have a tic disorder or Tourette syndrome?
☐ ☐ 
6. Do you have significant insomnia or problems falling asleep?
☐ ☐ 
7. Do you have significant problems with emotional impulsiveness,
anger, or conflicts with others in the early morning?
☐ ☐ 
8. Do you have any concern over using a Schedule II stimulant
(possibly due to adverse publicity or abuse potential of the
stimulants)?
☐ ☐ 
9. Will you encounter conflict or hostility from family members if you
take a stimulant?
☐ ☐ 
10. Are your doctors or you concerned about the greater logistic
difficulties of using a stimulant (frequent office visits, closer
monitoring, and associated increased medical costs)?
☐ ☐ 
11. Are you a college student for whom recreational misuse, theft, or
diversion may be a potential problem?
☐ ☐ 
12. Do you have a history of drug abuse?
☐ ☐ 
13. Does anyone living with you, such as an immediate family
member, have such a history?
☐ ☐ 
14. Have you suffered significant insomnia from taking a stimulant in
the past?
☐ ☐ 
15. Have you experienced significant morning irritability, anger, or
other behavioral problems while taking a stimulant?
☐ ☐ 
16. Have you experienced blunting of affect or abnormal restriction
of emotional expression (blandness) on a stimulant?
Totals: Total count of “yes” and “no” boxes checked

148 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
The more “yes” answers you give, the more I believe you should consider
atomoxetine or another nonstimulant before going on a stimulant. Your doctor
might also consider combining the two—using
lower doses of each—to give you better (broader)
coverage of your various concerns while limiting the
occurrence of the typical side effects arising from
each.
Arriving at the Right Dosage
The dose it takes to treat ADHD successfully varies
widely from person to person. Some adults require
very small doses, equal to those used for children,
while others need much higher doses, well above the average. Expect your physi-
cian to play with the range of doses for you, starting with a low dose and increas-
ing it every week until you have a good response or such annoying side effects that
going to an even higher dose is no longer an option.
But be patient. Sometimes it can take 2–3 weeks or even 1–2 months to find
the best dose for your situation.
If the first drug tried does not work for you or work
as well as you and your doctor would like, several other

ing it every week until you have a good response or such annoying side effects that
going to an even higher dose is no longer an option.
But be patient. Sometimes it can take 2–3 weeks or even 1–2 months to find
the best dose for your situation.
If the first drug tried does not work for you or work
as well as you and your doctor would like, several other
options may well be the right ones for you.
Let’s say you try a methylphenidate delivery system
such as the time-release pellets Ritalin LA or Focalin
XR without much success. The delivery system, not the
particular medication, might be the problem. Switch-
ing to the water-based osmotic pump Concerta or
skin patch Daytrana might work for you. Failing that,
switch to an amphetamine delivery system, like Adder-
all XR or Vyvanse, or to the nonstimulant atomoxetine
If you think you’re not benefiting
from a drug you’re trying, be sure
to ask for feedback from someone
who lives with you or is otherwise
close to you. Sometimes the
changes you’re experiencing are
easier for others to see.
The chances are quite good that the first medication you try will work for you:
• 
You have only a 10–25% chance of not responding to the first drug tried.
• 
You have only a 3–10% chance of not being able to tolerate the drug at all.
Your doctor should always
treat the most impairing or
life-threatening condition first.
If, for example, you have bipolar
disorder or serious depression,
the first medication tried should
be for that condition, before you
start an ADHD medication.

What to expect from Treatment 149
(Strattera). If these medications don’t work for you, a trial on guanfacine XR
might be indicated. A physician should go off label and use a non-FDA-approved
drug for your ADHD only if you have shown no positive response to any of the
others or you have another condition that needs to be treated first. In that case,
bupropion might be an option for managing your ADHD.
Monitoring the Treatment
Medications designed to treat ADHD target the specific problems in the brain
discussed in Step Two. Once you’ve landed on the right medication for you, you’ll
notice that:
✓ You’re more productive at work
✓ You’re better at sticking to tasks you need to do
✓ You can work better independently of others
✓ Your impulse control has improved
✓ You’re more thoughtful about what you’re doing
✓ You can better organize your thoughts
✓ It’s easier to carry on conversations
✓ Your time management seems to be better
✓ You can now stick with boring tasks like writing business letters or reports
without as much effort
✓ You’re following through on promises
✓ Your emotions are under better control
At the start of your medication treatment, your doctor will probably want to
see you or at least speak with you weekly to adjust the dosage as needed until your
symptoms are controlled as much as possible. Afterward, you’ll have to contact
the doctor monthly if you’re taking a stimulant, since most states require that you
get a new prescription each month; refills are not allowed. Typically, this prescrip-
tion must be filled within a few days to a week, and it can’t be filled outside the
state or the county in which it was written. Atomoxetine is not a controlled drug
and can be refilled several times before a new prescription is required. The same
is true for guanfacine XR.
Once you’ve found a dose that works for you, your doctor will likely need

tion must be filled within a few days to a week, and it can’t be filled outside the
state or the county in which it was written. Atomoxetine is not a controlled drug
and can be refilled several times before a new prescription is required. The same
is true for guanfacine XR.
Once you’ve found a dose that works for you, your doctor will likely need

150 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
to see you for routine follow-up exams every 3–6 months. We’ve found that peo-
ple often need additional dosage adjustments after the first 3–6 months on their
medication, whenever they’ve had an unusual weight gain or loss, or when their
life circumstances have changed dramatically and so has control of their symp-
toms. For instance, returning to college full-time could increase your need for
time management, self-organization, and self-motivation skills, necessitating an
increase in your dose, at least for the days you’re in the classroom or studying.
Or if you’re a computer salesperson, you might find you need only small doses to
manage your ADHD on days when you’re calling on many customers in a region
but more medication on days when you have stacks of paperwork to do, or should
you get a promotion to district sales manager. Ordinarily, though, without such a
marked change in circumstances or weight, once a dose has been established for a
few months it typically can remain stable for many months afterward.
To help you monitor any changes in your symptoms, you might consider using
the ADHD Symptom Tracking Scale at the end of this chapter. It can give your
doctor more precise information about how medication may be improving your
symptoms and whether additional dose increases might be necessary. It can also
help you remember to pass on to your doctor far more specific information than
you might recall without recording it.
When should the medication be discontinued? Doctors typically recommend
that adults take their medication 7 days a week, year-round, because the impair-
ments ADHD can produce occur not just at work or in college but in many other
areas of life, such as driving, raising children, home responsibilities, managing
money, and social relationships, all of which may benefit from medications for
ADHD and might be affected detrimentally if the medication were stopped. So
long as you’re experiencing impairments in any of these areas, medication should
continue.
Yet there may also be times when going off the medication might make sense,
at least temporarily. In my clinical experience some adults have found that the
medication they were taking greatly restricted their range of emotions and even
creativity. While this is not common and has not been documented in research
studies, these individuals were in unique employment situations where their com-
plaints made some sense.
One such person was a poet. She took her medication most days because of
the responsibilities she had running a household, paying bills, driving, and the
like, but found that she was far less creative as a poet on the days that she set aside
for writing. So, she would stop her medication for just those days, and the arrange-
ment worked well for her. Poetry is nothing without its emotion, imagery, and
metaphor, and she found her emotion was greatly restricted by her medication.
Another was a talented musician who played with a nearby symphony. Like
the poet, he found that the medication was very useful for days when he was not

ment worked well for her. Poetry is nothing without its emotion, imagery, and
metaphor, and she found her emotion was greatly restricted by her medication.
Another was a talented musician who played with a nearby symphony. Like
the poet, he found that the medication was very useful for days when he was not

What to expect from Treatment 151
playing his cello in the symphony and just doing routine household tasks, paying
bills, or reading. But when he performed with the orchestra, he was much more
connected to and expressive of the emotional tenor of his music—the qualities
that had made him such a successful musician—if he went off his medication.
Is the effectiveness of medication likely to be influenced by any major
changes in the body, like a major weight gain or weight loss or hormonal
changes (perimenopause/menopause)?
Some people, particularly growing children, do find that their dose must be
adjusted with time. This is likely due to weight gain, growth in height, and other
changes with maturation. These are less likely to be issues in adults, but some
adults have reported changes in the effectiveness of their medication with weight
changes. Therefore, doses may need to be adjusted from time to time, though less
often than in children. We have no evidence about the impact of perimenopause
or even monthly menstrual cycles on medication effectiveness, although they
do worsen ADHD symptoms in some women, so this is a question that remains
unanswered at this time.
It’s Not Always about ADHD
Keep in mind that no medication for ADHD will miraculously solve all your
problems. Troubles at work, in relationships, and elsewhere are not all caused by
ADHD. Naturally, then, medication for ADHD won’t erase them just because it
is working. Unfortunately, figuring out which ongoing problems in your life need
to be addressed by some other route can be tricky.
Is your girlfriend always mad at you because you still forget to call her when
you’ve promised to? Or because you two are just incompatible?
Were you passed over for promotion because you don’t know what to say and
not say to your boss? Or because you haven’t acquired the skills needed for
the next job level?
Are you being harassed by a collection agency because you don’t pay your
bills on time (or at all)? Or because you just don’t have enough money for the
debts you have taken on, or maybe they’ve just mixed you up with someone
else?
In many cases, the first problem in each situation described may well be a
consequence of having ADHD, while the second would not—and would not be
?

152 CHAnGe YouR BRAIn
expected to change as a result of taking an ADHD medication. Many people
with ADHD find that it’s easier to sort out the answers to these questions once
medication is helping them think more clearly. For some it takes practice. Living
with untreated ADHD for a long time can leave you with a history of mistakes
you didn’t need to make. Those mistakes can leave other people expecting bad
behavior and poor decisions from you. In turn, you can end up resentful and
defensive. Even now that you can function better, you might have trouble looking
objectively at what’s causing your problems. Do other people see what they expect
based on your past rather than the way you are in the present? Has all the criticism
you’ve received over the years left you expecting blame, seeing malicious intent
where none exists? ADHD can leave you with a pile of unproductive attitudes and

objectively at what’s causing your problems. Do other people see what they expect
based on your past rather than the way you are in the present? Has all the criticism
you’ve received over the years left you expecting blame, seeing malicious intent
where none exists? ADHD can leave you with a pile of unproductive attitudes and
shoot-yourself-in-the-foot habits that are hard to shake. That’s why many adults
with ADHD recruit therapists, counselors, or life coaches to help them start fresh.
Giving Medication a Helping Hand
Therapists and life coaches can be of huge assistance to many adults with ADHD
once they have begun a course of effective medication. Please understand, though,
that there is no scientific evidence this kind of treatment will suffice on its own.
It can, however, help you face the specific, unique issues you’re dealing with. Or it
may help fill in the gaps left when medication is simply not sufficient to address all
aspects of your ADHD or at times of day when medications simply cannot be
used.
Numerous strategies and tools for dealing with any
remaining symptoms and impairments in the various
arenas in which you operate are at your disposal. Consult-
ing a psychologist or coach is one way to tap into them.
Another is to read the rest of this book. Steps Four and
Five offer a raft of techniques for improving your daily life.
All of them are based on my theory that ADHD is a dis-
order of self-control, a condition that leaves you without
a good sense of time. All are based on the principle that
ADHD isn’t a matter of not knowing what to do, but of
not doing what you know when you need to do it. Add
these methods to medication and you’re well on your way
to a better life.
The Resources at
the back of the book
list organizations and
support groups that can
help you acquire life
skills, and sources for
referral to therapists
and life coaches.


153
ADHD Symptom Tracking Scale
Name: Date:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR SECTION I
This form is designed to obtain your opinion on how often you demonstrate the fol-
lowing behavior. Please circle the number next to each item that describes how often
that behavior has occurred during the period indicated below. Place a check mark
() by one of these time periods to indicate what period of time you are considering
when completing this form. Then share this form with your doctor to give him or her
more complete information about your usual level of ADHD before starting medica-
tion or during the initial phase when you begin taking medication.
During the past 6 months (baseline)
Since starting medication
Since the medication dose was changed
Since stopping medication
Symptoms
Never or
rarely
Some-
times Often
Very
often
1. Poor attention to details or careless
in my work
0 1 2 3
2. Fidgety or squirm when seated 
0 1 2 3
3. Can’t sustain attention to tasks or leisure
pursuits
0 1 2 3
4. Struggle to remain seated when expected
to do so
0 1 2 3
5. Don’t listen when others speak to me 0 1 2 3
(cont.)
From Taking Charge of Adult ADHD, Second Edition by Russell A. Barkley. Copyright © 2022 The Guilford Press. Purchasers of this
book can photocopy and/or download enlarged versions of this scale (see the box at the end of the Contents).

0 1 2 3
5. Don’t listen when others speak to me 0 1 2 3
(cont.)
From Taking Charge of Adult ADHD, Second Edition by Russell A. Barkley. Copyright © 2022 The Guilford Press. Purchasers of this
book can photocopy and/or download enlarged versions of this scale (see the box at the end of the Contents).

154
ADHD Symptom Tracking Scale (page 2 of 3)
Symptoms
Never or
rarely
Some-
times Often
Very
often
6. Restless 0 1 2 3
7. Have trouble completing instructions and
so don’t finish tasks
0 1 2 3
8. Find it hard to be quiet in leisure activities 0 1 2 3
9. Poorly organized in tasks 0 1 2 3
10. Feel like I need to be busy or “on the go” 0 1 2 3
1 1 . Procrastinate work that requires
prolonged effort
0 1 2 3
12. Talk too much 0 1 2 3
13. Misplace stuff I need for tasks or things I
must get done
0 1 2 3
14. Blurt out answers before others finish
what they are asking of me
0 1 2 3
15. Distractible 0 1 2 3
16. Can’t wait for my turn at activities I do
with others
0 1 2 3
17. Trouble remembering things in routine
tasks
0 1 2 3
18. Interrupt what others may be doing 
0 1 2 3
(cont.)

155
ADHD Symptom Tracking Scale (page 3 of 3)
INSTRUCTIONS FOR SECTION II
To what extent do the problems you circled above interfere with your ability to func-
tion in each of these areas of life activities?
Activities
Never or
rarely
Some-
times Often
Very
often
In my home life with immediate family 0 1 2 3
In social relations with others 0 1 2 3
In my activities in the community 0 1 2 3
In school or other learning environments
(if involved in an educational setting)
0 1 2 3
In sports, clubs, or other organizations 0 1 2 3
In driving 0 1 2 3
In leisure or recreational activities 0 1 2 3
In managing my money and finances 0 1 2 3
In my dating or marital relationships 0 1 2 3
In raising children 0 1 2 3
In my handling of daily chores or other
responsibilities
0 1 2 3



157
Step Four
Change Your Life
everyday Rules for Success
ADHD can make you feel like you’re on a treadmill. Your symptoms make it much
harder for you than for others to meet the demands of adult life. Some tasks don’t
get done by the deadline. Others elude you day after day no matter how hard you
try. You can end up exhausted at the end of the day and still feel like you haven’t
gotten anywhere.
Fortunately, the medication that normalizes many people’s symptoms can
level the playing field. In fact, as I’ve said before, many of the adults I’ve known
with ADHD declare that effective medication has completely turned their life
around. If you feel that way after you’ve worked with your doctor to find the right
medication, you might be tempted to close this book right now.
Feel free to do so. Put the book down and get on with the rest of your life.
Just keep the book where you can find it easily. I hope you’ll come back to
it soon, because taking Step Four can give you a valuable edge:
• The principles you’ll learn in Step Four augment your treatment, kind of the
way diet and exercise augment insulin for diabetes. Even with effective
medication, you may experience some residual symptoms; the rules that
follow can do the “cleanup.”
• The eight rules for everyday success provide you with backup for particularly
hard times. A major life crisis, physical illness, or any other stressful event
might temporarily change the efficacy of your medication. Having an
“emergency tool kit” on hand can keep you on a successful path at those

• The eight rules for everyday success provide you with backup for particularly
hard times. A major life crisis, physical illness, or any other stressful event
might temporarily change the efficacy of your medication. Having an
“emergency tool kit” on hand can keep you on a successful path at those
times.
• If for any reason your medication becomes less effective, the rules in Step Four

158 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
can fill in while you and your doctor figure out a new medication regimen.
Again, it’s always wise to have a Plan B.
• The rules help you break old ingrained habits instilled by ADHD symptoms.
Even with medication helping you override the deficits of ADHD, old hab-
its can cling. These rules remind you that there’s a different way to conduct
your daily affairs so you can get on with living a good life without delay.
Remember, in Chapter 11 I said there’s a lot you can do to shape your envi-
ronment so that it suits your needs. Step Four is all about learning certain underly-
ing principles that will help you do that in your daily life. Change the situation
enough, and you reduce how handicapped or disabled you will be within it.
Each of the eight rules for success is based on the
symptoms of ADHD and their roots in the brain. Fol-
low them and you’re directly counteracting the tenden-
cies created by your ADHD brain that you read about in
Step Two. Throughout Step Four I’ll help you connect
the dots between the greatest difficulties ADHD causes you (which you identified
in Step Two) and the rules that will be most important for you to learn and follow.
Use these rules whenever you want to succeed:
• When you need to get things done
• When it’s important not to make mistakes
• When you need to be on time
• When you want to keep learning from the past so you can prepare for the
future
• When you want to reach your goals so you can end your day knowing you
may be tired, but at least you have something to show for it!
Disorders belong to people.
Handicaps belong to situations.

159
16
Rule 1: Stop the Action!
If you have adult ADHD, Rule 1 is for you. It’s as simple as that.
The problems with self-control that are at the heart of ADHD begin with
difficulty resisting impulses. Your boss proposes doubling your sales goals for the
year, and before you can bite your tongue you bark out a laugh and say, “Are you
crazy?” At the first sight of your neighbor’s new lawn ornament you tell him it
makes his house look like a cheap motel, and now he’s not speaking to you—
again. You see a gorgeous pair of designer shoes in a store window and rush in
to buy them even though every penny of the paycheck you have in your purse is
already spoken for.
By not stopping before you act, you allow no time for thinking. That thinking
includes using your hindsight and foresight to get a feel for the situation, recall
what has happened before, and consider what you should do next. It also includes
giving yourself time to talk the situation over with yourself, using your mind’s
voice to consider how to deal with the situation.
Fortunately, you are not entirely without mental brake
linings. But even with the full benefit of any medication
you’re taking, learning to stop reacting quickly to events
around you with impulsive decisions, comments, and
actions is going to take practice. Remember, the executive
functions give you the capacity to exercise self-control.
Making a conscious effort to use that capacity is up to you.

linings. But even with the full benefit of any medication
you’re taking, learning to stop reacting quickly to events
around you with impulsive decisions, comments, and
actions is going to take practice. Remember, the executive
functions give you the capacity to exercise self-control.
Making a conscious effort to use that capacity is up to you.
Start by getting a handle on where you are most likely
to behave impulsively and where it can be most damaging
📒
 
What Rule 1 can do for you:
Buy you some time before you respond
Go back to
Chapters 6 and 7 to see
what insights came to
you about where and
how your impulsivity
has harmed you.


160 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
for you. There are times and places where it’s OK to be impulsive, talkative, spon-
taneous, or capricious—or where it’s at least unlikely to cost you much of any-
thing (like a large party or raucous nightclub). But there are times and places
you already know of where behaving this way can cost you dearly (work, college,
intimate relationships).
Figure Out Where Impulsivity Hurts You Most
Don’t just guess at the answer. If you need to, compile a list of these costly situa-
tions from your past experience. Ask your spouse, your partner, a good friend, or a
sibling to help you pinpoint your trouble spots. Write them down or ask the other
person to do it for you so you have a reminder of where to be on guard and where
to practice “stopping the action” most.
Where is impulsivity a big problem for you?
At work?
Where and when?
While dating?
What typically happens?
In conversation?
With whom—a friend, partner, spouse, or other loved one?
When you shop with a credit card?
What stores (or websites) and items do you find irresistible?

Stop the Action! 161
Strategy: Perform a simple action to stave off the urge to act.
Before you enter one of the situations you just identified, the next time the
occasion arises, I want you to practice buying yourself a few seconds to give your
thinking a chance to kick in by performing any of the following simple actions:
✓ Inhale slowly, exhale slowly, put on a thoughtful expression, and say to
yourself, “Well, let me think about that.”
✓ Just say, “Hmmmm, let me see now” pensively after inhaling and exhaling.
✓ Put your hand over your mouth for a few seconds.
✓ Or just put your hand on your chin as if in a thoughtful posture as a cue
to keep your mouth shut and not say the first thing that comes to mind.
Almost any small action will do. In Chapter 9 I mentioned an adult who
mentally locks his mouth with an invisible key to prevent himself from speaking.
Once you’ve ingrained the habit of using public, outward actions to buy yourself
time, you can shift to using mental gestures like that. For now, try a more public
version of the locking trick: Put your hand behind your back or in a pocket and
perform a key-turning motion.
To buy even a few more seconds, paraphrase what the other person just said to
you:
✓ “Oh, so you want to know about. . . . ”
✓ “You’re asking me to. . . . ”
✓ “What you need done is. . . . ”
✓ “You feel that. . . . ”
When you get behind the wheel of your car?
Always or only on certain routes or at certain times?
Other?

To buy even a few more seconds, paraphrase what the other person just said to
you:
✓ “Oh, so you want to know about. . . . ”
✓ “You’re asking me to. . . . ”
✓ “What you need done is. . . . ”
✓ “You feel that. . . . ”
When you get behind the wheel of your car?
Always or only on certain routes or at certain times?
Other?

162 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
Again, these are just examples. Pick a phrase that’s easy for you to remember,
that will roll off your tongue easily, so you’re likely to use it.
The key is not to say or do anything else in those first few seconds. Notice
I did not say don’t do anything. You’ve undoubtedly been told to stop and think
many times before, but no one ever tells you how you’re supposed to curb an
incredibly strong urge to act or speak and just stand there and do nothing when
every molecule in your body is urging you to do something. The reason this little
ploy works is that it does give you something to do while you’re buying the time to
think that ADHD usually denies you.
Practice: Try to practice doing this often, every day, lots of times a day,
even when you’re alone. This behavior comes naturally to those without ADHD
because the motor system of their brain is not as quick to fire off as yours is. It may
be unconscious for them, but it has to be very, very conscious for you—at least at
first. The more you practice, the sooner it will become an unconscious habit. It
will be hard, but believe me, it’s worth it! You are going to try doing this so often
that people may look at you funny: Why does this guy always have his hand on his
chin or over his mouth? Why does this woman constantly repeat back to me what
I’ve just said? Try not to worry about it; it’s better than getting an angry, shocked,
or disgusted reaction. If you’re having trouble developing a thick skin about others’
responses to you, check out Rule 8.
Strategy: Pick a slow-talking model and play that role when you converse.
You gotta stop playing Tigger and become Winnie the Pooh. Quit being
a Robin Williams in some rapid-fire stand-up comedy act and start being more
thoughtful, like Tom Hanks or Will Rogers. Slow it down. Think of yourself as a
southerner instead of a northerner. Even just taking a little extra time to utter a
sentence will give that theater in your mind time to load up the DVD of your past
experience and get the camera playing on your mental screen. Practice speaking
slowly in the mirror. See yourself as your slow-talking role model. Speaking more
slowly will give your frontal lobes a chance to get some traction, to get engaged
instead of being swept along in the incessant tide of your impulses.
Following Rule 1 helps you buy time to let your private mental home theater
gear up and show you some video of your past experiences that may pertain to the
present situation. Having bought that time, you must now consciously try to think
about the situation. Thinking here means visualizing your past relevant experi-
ences to find out what they have to tell you. The next rule will help you do this.

gear up and show you some video of your past experiences that may pertain to the
present situation. Having bought that time, you must now consciously try to think
about the situation. Thinking here means visualizing your past relevant experi-
ences to find out what they have to tell you. The next rule will help you do this.

163
17
Rule 2: See the Past . . .
and Then the Future
When a problem arises during your day, are you often completely thrown
about what’s likely to happen and what to do? Do you constantly beat yourself
up for making the same mistakes again and again? Rule 2 is for you.
You already know that your mind’s eye (nonverbal working memory) is not as
powerful as those of people without ADHD. This makes it really challenging to
activate your mental imagery related to hindsight and foresight before taking
action. You may very well already look back at your life and even look ahead for
what your experience can tell you is going to happen, but only after you’ve already
acted and the dust has settled. The good news here is that being able to exercise
hindsight at all tells you that you do possess the capacity. The bad news is that
exercising hindsight only after the fact usually leads directly to beating yourself up
for having done or said the wrong thing. On top of the
criticism of others, self-blame can beat you right into
the ground, and you might find it harder and harder to
get back up.
As to foresight, being able to extract from past
experience what’s likely to happen in the future is
great—as long as you can do it on the spot in the situ-
ations where you need that forecast. A decision you
made last week to do something differently is likely to
evaporate before you have a chance to follow through.
📒
 
What Rule 2 can do for you:
Help you see what’s coming next
Go back to Chapter 9
to remind yourself of
the specific difficulties
with the mind’s eye that
sounded familiar when
you read the “Nonverbal
Working Memory” section.


164 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
You need a way to make sure that what you learned from the past stays accessible
when you need it.
Identify Where You Have Weaknesses
in Nonverbal Working Memory
Figure out where you have the most trouble looking ahead; those are the places
where you’ll most want to practice seeing the past.
Strategy: Use an imaginary visual device to turn on your mind’s eye.
Learning to stop the action gives you that mental space to turn on the mind’s
eye. But your mind’s eye is so fragile that the next irrelevant thing that happens
around you can fracture what you were trying to think about. Suddenly your mind
is off, wandering to whatever tangent that distraction suggested to you. So what
you need to do is mentally call up some visual device that you usually find engross-
ing. Your big flat-screen TV? Your favorite video or computer game? The minicam
on your smartphone? Right after you stop the action, click on this device. You
Do you hit every problem with a “hammer,” because they all look like
“nails” to you?
Adults with ADHD haven’t compiled a large store of
remembered past experiences, so the subtle differences among
problems and the need for different tools to solve them often elude
them.
Does learning anything new require you to go through a long, slow
trial-and-error process?
If you can’t call up mental images easily, you have to keep
trying one thing after another.
Do you have trouble saving money, sticking to a diet, or perfecting

problems and the need for different tools to solve them often elude
them.
Does learning anything new require you to go through a long, slow
trial-and-error process?
If you can’t call up mental images easily, you have to keep
trying one thing after another.
Do you have trouble saving money, sticking to a diet, or perfecting
an athletic skill?
Deferring gratification is tough when you can’t keep calling up
the mental image of the prize that lies ahead.

See the Past . . . and Then the Future 165
can even use a surreptitious physical motion to turn it on right when you’re saying
“Hmmmm” or right after you’ve used the same hand to make a locking motion.
Now try to focus your mind and literally see for yourself, on the screen of that
device, whatever light your past may shed on this particular situation. Visualize
what happened the last time you were in a situation like this. Get creative. See the
past unfolding in all its colorful, detailed action, as if you’re filming it or replaying
it right in the space that you’re in.
Practice: The more often you do this, the more habitual and automatic it
will become, and the more different “videos” will pop into your mind from your
memory bank to guide your future. You’ll be able to think: “Wow, the last time I
interrupted a meeting with a joke, everyone laughed at me, not the punch line.”
Or “I felt really guilty when I got home with those shoes and discovered my son
needed some expensive books for school and I didn’t have the money.” Don’t just
practice projecting the mind’s eye onto a TV or computer monitor in your highest-
risk situations. To cement the habit, do it where it’s easiest to do—where the
stakes are lower, there’s no pressure, and it’s easier for you to stop the action and
give yourself the opportunity.
Strategy: Use tangible visual aids to give your mind’s eye extra help.
More on this in Rule 4. But let’s say there’s a particular setting where your
mind’s eye is blind and you’re tired of beating yourself up for not seeing what you
should have done. Shoot a photo, clip one out of a magazine, or draw a picture
of something that represents the “don’t.” Do the same for one that represents the
“do.” Put them up where you can see them often, reinforcing those mental circuits
that connect what you want with what you’ve done in the past that has put it out
of your reach. The woman whose downfall was expensive shoes posted inside her
closet door a designer shoe ad coupled with a photocopy of her bank statement
showing a zero balance. Opposite that she posted a picture of her son and a photo
she clipped from a magazine of a high school diploma. Seeing it every day helped
the same images pop into her head when she passed by her favorite shoe store.
Your mind’s eye (nonverbal working memory) may be weaker and less effec-
tive than that of others. But you also have a mind’s voice. And that can serve to
enhance what you are trying to visualize in your mind. Read on to Rule 3.

the same images pop into her head when she passed by her favorite shoe store.
Your mind’s eye (nonverbal working memory) may be weaker and less effec-
tive than that of others. But you also have a mind’s voice. And that can serve to
enhance what you are trying to visualize in your mind. Read on to Rule 3.

166
18
Rule 3: Say the Past . . .
and Then the Future
Do you see what’s coming and still go with the knee-jerk response? Do you
feel like you keep having to learn the same lessons over and over? Rule 3 is
for you.
Nonverbal working memory—the mind’s eye—isn’t enough for most of us
if we want to operate successfully in the adult world. Not only do we need to see
what happened the last time we took a certain course of action. We also need to
be able to analyze each situation before us and weigh the pros and cons of different
responses. Let’s say you know that blurting out your opinion in the middle of the
last meeting was a mistake. When your boss presents a new plan that you think
is misguided at this week’s meeting, do you just clam up? Write your thoughts
in a memo to him later? Recruit some allies and tell him about your misgivings
together? Come up with an alternative plan?
We need to be able to distill rules and guidelines from what we experience so
that we get better and better at responding and planning as time goes on. Waiting
till after an open meeting to express an opinion that might not be received well is
one example of a rule you could adopt in the workplace. Knowing who your allies
📒
 
What Rule 3 can do for you:
Help you analyze the situation before
deciding what to do
Help you develop rules you can use for the
same situations in the future

Say the Past . . . and Then the Future 167
are among coworkers might be a good guideline for getting ahead in your job and
career.
The key ingredient in these mental processes is language. When we learn to
stop the action and then see the past so we can foresee the future, the only way
to learn from the mental imagery is to use words to describe it. Talking to our-
selves is central to problem solving. It’s essential to planning. It’s even critical to
understanding the rules of society. Weak verbal working memory, in fact, is why
it’s not uncommon for adults with ADHD to rack up a criminal record, often of
misdemeanors. It’s not malevolence that causes the lawbreaking but a fundamen-
tal failure to apply or follow the rules at key moments in life, usually because of
impulsiveness. Unless you talk to yourself about your options, it can be pretty easy
to decide, for example, that shoplifting something that’s caught your eye is OK
because you are not likely to be seen or you can always return it later.
Having a grasp of what ADHD does to your executive functions can really
help you compensate for deficits. Yes, your mind’s voice (verbal working memory)
is weaker and less effective than those of people who don’t have ADHD. On
the other hand, if you practice using it and make it stronger, you can use your
improved verbal working memory to compensate for a weak nonverbal working
memory. And vice versa. Talk to yourself about the mental images you’re able to
call up and you strengthen those visual memories for later use. Enrich your bank
of visual memories and you have more information to analyze logically with your
mind’s voice. The bottom line? You improve the odds of your making better, more

memory. And vice versa. Talk to yourself about the mental images you’re able to
call up and you strengthen those visual memories for later use. Enrich your bank
of visual memories and you have more information to analyze logically with your
mind’s voice. The bottom line? You improve the odds of your making better, more
nuanced decisions.
Identify Your Biggest Verbal Working
Memory Problem Areas
Developing verbal working memory skills is a relatively sophisti-
cated achievement. To start practicing, try to come up with a mod-
est goal you haven’t been able to reach due to poor verbal working
memory. For example, you may really want to manage your own
investments, but it might make sense to start with a simple savings
plan that requires you to deposit a small amount of cash in a sav-
ings account every week first. Even a simple-sounding goal is a lot
harder to pursue consistently than you might think before you start.
Strategy: Become your own interviewer.
Don’t just see the mental images in your mind:
What
did you learn
about your
mind’s voice in
Chapter 9?


168 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
✓ Discuss them with yourself.
✓ Label them.
✓ Describe just what you are seeing in your mind’s eye.
✓ Then extract some rule or principle from this review
that tells you what you want to do the next time you
face this situation.
Literally picture yourself holding a microphone and interviewing yourself on
TV. Verbally describe the situation you’re in. Ask yourself relevant questions. Be
as tough on yourself as the most dogged journalist. Ask yourself questions like
these:
✓ “What’s going on here?”
✓ “Have I been in a situation like this before?”
✓ “What’s the same and what’s different?”
That voice in your head is
not just there to keep you
company. It’s a device to
help with self-control.
Do you have trouble reading other people’s emotions?
With particular people and in particular situations or all the
time?
Do you find it very difficult to understand and follow rules?
Where and when?
Do you have trouble understanding and retaining what you’ve read?
Do you decide to begin a diet, a savings plan, or another program
and then drop it almost immediately?

Say the Past . . . and Then the Future 169
✓ “What did I do last time?”
✓ “Is that an option here?”
✓ “Are there better choices?”
✓ “If I decide to do X, what will happen?
✓ “Have I seen X [a successful person you admire] do this? If not, what has
X done in similar situations?”
✓ “If my decision turns out badly, how will I feel tomorrow?”
Strategy: Narrate what’s happening out loud.
As you know, kids narrate their own play all the time. As adults, we’re sup-
posed to have learned how to make this commentary private and internal. Unfor-
tunately, ADHD has other ideas. So let’s go back to
what worked so well when we were kids. Go ahead
and describe what’s happening to you in all the rich,
vivid language you can come up with out loud. You
don’t have to make it loud; just out loud. Externally
vocalized words, even when just whispered, are more
powerful at controlling and guiding our behavior
than words we may say in our mind. You might feel
most comfortable doing this when you’re alone. You
certainly won’t want to do it where you could disturb someone. But it’s possible
to choose situations where you can practice this without fear of someone else’s
reaction:
✓ When you’re working on a project at home and trying to decide whether

than words we may say in our mind. You might feel
most comfortable doing this when you’re alone. You
certainly won’t want to do it where you could disturb someone. But it’s possible
to choose situations where you can practice this without fear of someone else’s
reaction:
✓ When you’re working on a project at home and trying to decide whether
to keep at it or abandon it for something more fun
✓ When you’re trying to stick to the rules of the road while behind the wheel
and you’re alone in the car
✓ On a jog or walk through the woods when you’re planning what you’re
going to do with the rest of your day
Just take the solitude as an opportunity to get used to verbalizing where you
are, what you’re doing, what you could do next, and what might happen. While
you’re at a task, give yourself instructions about keeping at it, doing it carefully,
Even if you’re around other
people, you can pretend you’re
using a hands-free device,
talking on your cell phone. You’ll
blend right in with everyone else.

170 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
completing each step, and finishing the project. You’ll find you’re much more
likely to see the task through to the end than if you just thought about these ideas
in your head.
Your mind’s eye and mind’s voice aren’t as strong as those of other people.
You can give them a boost by following Rules 1–3. But there’s even more you can
do to help yourself: see Rule 4.

171
19
Rule 4: Externalize
Key Information
Are you forgetful and scattered? Do people treat you as if you’re unreliable and
untrustworthy? Are you beginning to agree that you have no self-discipline or
stick-to-itiveness? If you have adult ADHD, you probably answered yes to all
of these questions. Rule 4 is most definitely for you.
Even with ADHD robbing you of some of the power of your executive func-
tions, you can build them to their greatest potential. That’s why it makes such
sense to follow Rules 1–3. The more you practice the strategies in the last three
chapters, the more you build those skills despite an innate deficit. That doesn’t
mean you have to stop there, however. You deserve all the help you can get in
leveling that playing field.
I can’t emphasize enough how important it is to avail yourself of the many
ways you can boost your internal memory with external cues. Kids with ADHD
get this kind of help in school when the teacher provides periodic reminders to
stay on task. Parents set up star charts to motivate children to keep up the efforts
they’re making with chores or homework. Parents also often use picture charts
that graphically break down the steps in routines like getting dressed for school so
that a child who gets lost or distracted in the middle of the process has something
to consult to stay on track.
Can you think of any reason why you shouldn’t get the same kind of assistance?
The difference for you, of course, is that you’re generally on your own here.
📒
 
What Rule 4 can do for you:
Give you something to rely on besides
your own memory

that a child who gets lost or distracted in the middle of the process has something
to consult to stay on track.
Can you think of any reason why you shouldn’t get the same kind of assistance?
The difference for you, of course, is that you’re generally on your own here.
📒
 
What Rule 4 can do for you:
Give you something to rely on besides
your own memory

172 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
You might be able to enlist the aid of a spouse or a roommate to some extent, but
for the most part it’s up to you to create and use external reminders. The good
news is that it can be fun. You get to use the abundant creativity bestowed on
many people, including those with ADHD.
Where Do You Still Have a Lot of Trouble . . . No
Matter How Much Mental Effort You Invest?
It doesn’t really matter whether your difficulty is with stopping
the action, seeing the past, or saying the past. The strategies for
externalizing information can be applied to any type of reminder
you need. You can—and should—use external cues all the time.
Many of the tools that are perfect for issuing reminders are immi-
nently portable and adaptable, meaning there’s no limit to how
and where you can take advantage of them. Still, it will help to
know which areas seem to be particularly memory resistant for
you so you can be sure to tackle them and spare yourself the frustration of ongo-
ing shortfalls.
Some of the
tools you can
include in your
arsenal are listed
in Chapter 10.

Do you still have lots of trouble staying silent when it would be
better to do so?
When and where?
Do you forget to gather tools or materials for the tasks you need to
do?
At work or elsewhere?

externalize Key Information 173
These are just a few problems that can be solved with the help of external-
ized information. Think of the “blunders” or “failures” you regret the most—that’s
where you can immediately apply one of the following strategies.
Strategy: Put physical cues in plain view in problem situations.
These cues can take many forms. Here are some examples keyed to particular
problem situations:
✓ A sign you put on the margin of your computer monitor or on your desk
within your visual field reminding you not to start surfing the web instead
of doing your work. Or try a picture of your boss on which you have
Does your mental to-do list always include items that get carried
over from day to day, never getting checked off?
Which kinds of tasks?
Do you feel like you’re often at the mercy of your emotions?
Which emotions are a particular problem for you (such as
anger, frustration, guilt, shame)?
Do you have less control in some situations or with certain people
than others?

174 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
printed “Get to Work!” Or, do as Homer Simpson did in one memorable
episode when he displayed a picture of his young daughter, Lisa, with the
statement “Do it for her!” beneath it.
✓ A note to yourself that you keep in the same pocket as your wallet so that
when you reach in to pull out the wallet and buy something you get the
note too—and it asks you whether you really need to make that purchase.
Better yet, make it a sticky note taped right onto that credit card.
✓ A card you tape on your smartphone screen that asks
whether that call you’re about to make can wait till
later, after you’ve finished whatever task you’re in the
middle of doing.
✓ A photo of the tennis trophy (or any prize) you want to
earn to keep you practicing.

Better yet, make it a sticky note taped right onto that credit card.
✓ A card you tape on your smartphone screen that asks
whether that call you’re about to make can wait till
later, after you’ve finished whatever task you’re in the
middle of doing.
✓ A photo of the tennis trophy (or any prize) you want to
earn to keep you practicing.
✓ A symbol, like a stop sign, that you can put anywhere to remind you to
stop the action before making any decision.
✓ A list of rules for writing a complicated report that you have to generate
every 2 weeks at work.
Physical cues are your stand-in for a shaky work-
ing memory. Something external, in front of us, is
a far more potent reminder than an image or word
held in our mind. Next time you enter the situation
for which you’ve created a cue, your cue will catch
your attention and remind you of what you intended
to do in that situation.
For example, do you impulsively eat too much
and want to lose weight? Put a picture of the latest
hot athlete, or film star, or your own younger, slimmer self on your refrigerator.
You could also post a stop sign on the refrigerator door that says, “Step away from
the refrigerator,” perhaps accompanied by a picture of a police officer you found in
a newspaper or magazine and clipped out to tape alongside your stop sign.
Strategy: Make a list of steps or procedures you want to follow the next time
you encounter a problem task.
To-do lists are used by everyone, ADHD or no ADHD, because they work so
well. If you end your day dejected because too many of the goals you set for the day
fall by the wayside, a to-do list can be a godsend. If you put it where you can’t miss
Your physical cue must
be in plain sight, right
in the place where you
need the reminder.
An external cue not only helps you
stop what you were impulsively
about to do but also tells you what
to do instead, and even why you
were trying to change yourself for
the better in the first place.

externalize Key Information 175
it, it will remind you of what you need to be doing right now, or next, when you
drift away toward something more fun or just something that entered your field of
vision and was hard to ignore. There’s nothing like the feeling of checking off that
last chore or task at the end of the day. Now you can have some fun!
I tried to use to-do lists, but I guess I got just as carried away writing the
list as I do with other things that I get immersed in. I didn’t know when
to stop and had a three-page list of things to do in a single day. I just
couldn’t seem to see when I wrote it that I was being insanely unrealistic
about how much I could get done in a day. How can I rein myself in and
write a reasonable to-do list?
One idea, if you have a sympathetic spouse, a mentor at work, or a sibling or
roommate who’s willing to pitch in occasionally, is to ask someone else to review
your list. Remember, one of your biggest stumbling blocks is a poor sense of time.
This can make it really tough to figure out how long each item on your list should
take (to say nothing of how to budget your time while you’re working on that list!).
Many adults who don’t have ADHD have a pretty good idea of how long standard
household tasks usually take. A mentor or boss at work will know how long work
jobs take. And you can start to develop a sense of how much longer than the aver-
age person you might need to do particular tasks, depending on your skills in that

Many adults who don’t have ADHD have a pretty good idea of how long standard
household tasks usually take. A mentor or boss at work will know how long work
jobs take. And you can start to develop a sense of how much longer than the aver-
age person you might need to do particular tasks, depending on your skills in that
area, how interesting you find the task, what the distractions usually are, and what
your attention span is usually like.
Which brings me to a second idea for reining in an out-of-control to-do list:
use a journal. If you keep track of how long you took to do certain tasks, you’ll
begin to know yourself and your habits well enough to budget your time more
accurately. See the following strategy.
Strategy: Carry a journal with you all the time.
A journal can help you record the specifics of certain tasks and what it takes
you to get them done, as just noted. But more generally it can serve as your record
of what you need to do. One of the greatest difficulties you’re likely to have with
working memory is remembering what others have told you that’s important. How
often have you disappointed yourself or someone else by forgetting:
✓ A date?
✓ A commitment?
✓ A promise?
?

176 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
✓ An appointment?
✓ A deadline?
Whether at work, in social relationships, or at home with your family,
the ability to remember what you’ve said you’d do is crucial to your integrity
and your image in the eyes of others. This is especially so for promises you make
to others. As I’m sure you know, for you it’s more routine to forget this sort of
information than to remember it. I’m sure you also know how dearly you pay for
these lapses—at work, at home, and elsewhere. The adults I know with ADHD
report that being viewed as more forgetful and less reliable than other adults—
being unable to keep and fulfill promises and commitments the way adults are
expected to do and generally being thought of as less trustworthy—causes them
more shame and distress than just about any other shortcoming that ADHD has
handed them.
You don’t have to resign yourself to that fate.
Start carrying a journal with you, as already noted
in Chapter 10. This can be a small blank notebook,
a bound journal, or anything else you can write in,
including the electronic devices mentioned in Chap-
ter 10. The point is you have to take this with you all
the time.
Just as you put your wallet in your back pocket or
purse, you should have a small paper journal or a smart-
phone for note taking on you at all times!
Today, before you have a chance to forget, start
using your journal: Write in it anything someone says
to you that you are to do, any promise you make, any commitment to others, date,
deadline, meeting, or other time-sensitive instructions—anything and everything
that may be important for you to remember.
Don’t consider yourself completely dressed in the morning until you slip that
journal and pencil or other note-taking device into your pocket.
If you carry a purse, putting your
journal in an outer flap where
you can see and reach it easily
is much better than putting it
inside the zipped or snapped main
compartment, where having to
fumble for it might deter you from
entering important information.
Smartphones or digital recording devices are ever present and may seem like
an obvious choice for your journal. But I’ve found that people are likely to use
and remember to read a small pocket journal, whereas they often misplace their

fumble for it might deter you from
entering important information.
Smartphones or digital recording devices are ever present and may seem like
an obvious choice for your journal. But I’ve found that people are likely to use
and remember to read a small pocket journal, whereas they often misplace their
little digital recorder or just forget to replay and listen to what they said earlier.

externalize Key Information 177
Don’t just write in your journal. Refer to it often, hourly
if need be, to keep yourself on target in honoring your agree-
ments, completing assigned work, fulfilling promises to others,
and meeting those deadlines. Set your smartphone alarm to ring
every 15 to 30 minutes to remind you to check that journal. If
you are an adult with ADHD, this journal should be with you at
all times unless a situation calls for you to be naked. Even then, it should be right
nearby, within easy reach, if you have to remember anything during this time.
As I said, adults with ADHD report that it’s awfully depressing to be viewed
as unreliable and immature. It doesn’t take long to agree with others’ assessment
and view yourself as devoid of persistence, self-discipline, and willpower. To help
address your executive function deficit, follow the next few rules.
A journal is invaluable:
It’s your external
working memory.

178
20
Rule 5: Feel the Future
If the purpose of the tasks you need to complete feels flat and abstract to you,
leaving you uninspired to keep at them, Rule 5 is for you.
One major consequence of what I call the time blindness of ADHD is diffi-
culty conjuring up the past so you can apply what you recall to the future. That’s
why Rules 2 and 3 are so important: They help you learn from your memories so
that you become more adept at handling similar situations up ahead. But ADHD
also leaves you with large gaps between the present and the future: If no one is
dangling a carrot right in front of your face, you may need lots of convincing to
keep moving toward your destination.
Sometimes the self-talk you learned in Rule 3 will keep you going. Telling
yourself that you need to get this job done, telling yourself how to do it, reminding
yourself of the steps you need to take along the way, and nudging yourself to pay
attention to the time can work in many situations. Another method that might
keep you at a task is to warn yourself about what will happen if you don’t do what
you’re supposed to do. This form of “saying the past” might involve reminding
yourself that you had to pay a lot more for your son’s textbook when you weren’t
able to buy it early because you had spent the money elsewhere. It might mean
listing the jobs you’ve lost because you didn’t meet assigned deadlines. It could be
telling yourself that your husband didn’t speak to you for a week after you made an
excuse to leave his father’s birthday party early because you were bored.
Unfortunately, for adults (and kids) with ADHD, the threat of negative con-
sequences isn’t the most potent incentive. And even if it were, not everything
comes with an obvious, direct, or dire consequence for nonperformance. For
many adult goals, you’re just supposed to do what you have to do because it has to
📒
 
What Rule 5 can do for you:
Keep you motivated to reach your goals

sequences isn’t the most potent incentive. And even if it were, not everything
comes with an obvious, direct, or dire consequence for nonperformance. For
many adult goals, you’re just supposed to do what you have to do because it has to
📒
 
What Rule 5 can do for you:
Keep you motivated to reach your goals

Feel the Future 179
get done and getting it done is the right thing to do. A lot of adults in the general
population find this intrinsic motivator pretty unmotivating too. Many people
who don’t have ADHD turn to the same types of incentives described in this
book, at least for some tasks they really don’t want to do. With ADHD thrown
into the mix, however, those incentives become essential. Here’s why:
✓ ADHD can make it tough for you to grasp the moral imperative behind
getting a task done for its own sake, so that’s not likely to move you.
✓ ADHD can turn uninteresting into agonizingly boring, making you feel
like you’re going to explode with restlessness if you can’t get away from a
task that’s no fun.
✓ ADHD can make it impossible to see that what you do may have not just
one bad consequence but two or three, each of which can lead to its own
six knock-on undesired outcomes, and that each of those can produce
twelve others, and so forth.
✓ And a poor sense of time can prevent you from grasping that all these
consequences can unfold much faster than you’d imagine, before you have
a chance to jump in and stop the avalanche.
Figure Out Where You Are Least Motivated
to Get Things Done
In which area do you find it hardest to stay motivated?
School?
Work?
Household chores?
Community activities?
Relationships? (Which ones?)
What items grow old on your to-do list because you don’t feel
motivated to finish them?

180 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
ADHD makes it hard to stay motivated to complete tasks for all the reasons listed
above. But there’s another reason that various responsibilities seem so uncompel-
ling, their purpose so flat and abstract: There is no emotion attached to getting
them done. Emotion is an extremely powerful motivator. In fact, our emotions are
the very source of our self-motivation.
Even our self-talk often relies more on emotion than we realize. Consider
again how we warn ourselves of the negative consequences of not finishing a task:
It’s not just the practical aspects of those consequences that we find undesirable.
Sure, having to spend more money than necessary on a textbook hurts your bank
account. Losing jobs hurts your bank account too. And receiving the silent treat-
ment from your spouse disrupts your daily routine. But what may
really move us to heed the warnings we give ourselves is our mem-
ory of how we felt about these consequences. Leaving your son
without a textbook he needs until you can come up with the cash
might make you feel shame. Being fired repeatedly is pretty humili-
ating and devastating to your self-esteem. And being shunned by
the person you love most really hurts and might make you angry
too.
For some people, the memory of these uncomfortable feelings is enough to
motivate them to do what they need to do to avoid a repeat performance. That’s
why you need to use your visual imaging of these past events and their emotions to help
you trigger the motivation you may need to get things done.
Recalling or anticipating the negative consequences of not doing something
Scientists studying human emotions have concluded that a major function

motivate them to do what they need to do to avoid a repeat performance. That’s
why you need to use your visual imaging of these past events and their emotions to help
you trigger the motivation you may need to get things done.
Recalling or anticipating the negative consequences of not doing something
Scientists studying human emotions have concluded that a major function
of emotion is to cause or motivate us to act. Although emotions are complex,
certain emotions generally lead to certain types of actions. Here are just a few
examples:
• 
Fear leads to “fight or flight”—attacking the source of danger or running
away.
• 
Anger leads us to right a wrong.
• 
Joy and pleasure lead to the urge to keep doing what we’re doing.
• 
Shame dissuades us from repeating the shameful act.
Visualize it →
Verbalize it →
Feel it

Feel the Future 181
is not as powerful a motivator for most people as focusing on the potential posi-
tive consequences of getting it done. Focusing on the negative can even get you
down compared to the uplifting, rejuvenating, and inspiring feelings you can get
by imagining how great it will feel to get to your goal.
Strategy: Ask yourself point blank, “What will it feel like when I get
this done?”
After seeing and saying the past to foresee the future, your next step is mak-
ing a conscious effort to really feel what it will be like when you finish the task at
hand or reach your goal. Ask yourself, “What will it feel like when I get this done?”
and then focus on that emotional sensation. What could it be?
✓ Pride?
✓ Self-satisfaction?
✓ The happiness you anticipate from completing that project?
✓ The sense of accomplishment you may experience?
✓ The pleasure or happiness of others with whom you have shared this goal
or for whom you are doing this job?
Whatever that emotion is, work hard to feel it, right then, right there, as you
contemplate your goals. Then keep doing this throughout your work or as you
pursue this goal or project. Every day, or every time you are in that situation, work-
ing toward that goal or destination, repeatedly ramp up your efforts to really feel
what it will be like when you get there.
All future-directed behavior needs a motive, and all motives
(motivations) are the consequence of our emotions. Your imagined
emotions, brought forth with a lot of conscious effort, can be the
fuel that drives your activities, boosting you toward your destina-
tion like a cruise missile. People without ADHD also propel them-
selves forward by imagining what reaching a desired destination
will feel like. The difference is that they can usually do it without
much thinking or effort because their sense of time and their visual
working memory are strong enough to allow such foresight easily.
For you, however, this has to be a very conscious, deliberate effort.
Give this technique a boost by cutting out pictures of the rewards you hope
to earn from what you are doing and placing these around you while you’re are
working. They’ll enhance the potency of your own imagery and therefore make
the emotions you’re anticipating even more vivid.
Feel that future,
and keep feeling it,
all the way, until
you get there!

Give this technique a boost by cutting out pictures of the rewards you hope
to earn from what you are doing and placing these around you while you’re are
working. They’ll enhance the potency of your own imagery and therefore make
the emotions you’re anticipating even more vivid.
Feel that future,
and keep feeling it,
all the way, until
you get there!

182 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
So, work on visualizing, verbalizing, and then feeling not just the goal and
the steps you need to achieve it, but also what you will feel when it finally gets
done. Every time you sit down to continue working on a project, task, or goal, one
of the things you must do is to feel that future outcome.
In Chapter 9 I suggested that calling up mental images of past accomplish-
ments can relieve stress and anxiety when you’re under the gun, leaving you feel-
ing both calm and motivated. If you have trouble imagining how you’ll feel when
you get a job done, start by recalling a similar task that you did get done. This is
a perfect example of how each method you use to thwart an executive function
deficit caused by ADHD boosts your ability to use another compensating strategy.
So this is another reason to practice following Rule 2: The more mental images of
past successes you’ve collected, the easier it will be to imagine the positive feelings
you’ll have when you complete the task before you right now.
A good reason to practice Rule 5 is that it will fill up your inner emotional
well. The same time blindness that keeps you from having as large a mental store
of visual or verbal memories as those without ADHD also causes you to have
fewer palpable, vibrant, potent, or motivating emotional memories. It’s not that
you don’t feel the emotions that others feel. It’s just that you may not have your
experiences with them slotted away in your mind to the same extent. Or they may
not be as easily retrievable as they are for people who aren’t dealing with ADHD.
This strategy, like those under the other rules in Step Four, makes it easier
for you to accomplish what you want right now, in this moment. But the more
you practice it, the more memories and skills you build, making it increasingly
easy in the future. So, “begin with the end in mind,” as Stephen Covey says in his
bestselling book The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People. Visualizing the goal and
feeling that sense of accomplishment, relief, pride, and success you will have, not
to mention seeing the rewards you may earn, can help to fill up that motivational
fuel tank you need to get through the work you have to do.
Meanwhile, though, you have more strategies at your disposal; turn to Rule 6.

183
21
Rule 6: Break It Down . . .
and Make It Matter
If pictures, words, and feelings are too fleeting to keep you on track, Rule
6 is for you. Actually, we’ve found that virtually everyone with ADHD benefits
from following Rule 6. Difficulties sustaining attention and seeing past the pres-
ent make it awfully hard to conjure up all the motivation you need internally. You
need a little help from the outside. Fortunately, the possibilities for getting it are
numerous and fairly easy to access. It’s all a matter of bringing that oh-so-distant
horizon into closer focus. But first, see if you can get a sense of why the future
always seems so far away:
What Makes Your Destinations Seem So Distant?
ADHD can make the future seem hopelessly distant. A goal that requires a sig-

numerous and fairly easy to access. It’s all a matter of bringing that oh-so-distant
horizon into closer focus. But first, see if you can get a sense of why the future
always seems so far away:
What Makes Your Destinations Seem So Distant?
ADHD can make the future seem hopelessly distant. A goal that requires a sig-
nificant investment of time, incorporates waiting periods, or has to be done in a
sequence of steps can prove so elusive that you feel overwhelmed. When that hap-
pens, many adults with ADHD yield to the temptation to find an escape route.
Maybe you literally run away, going AWOL at work or calling in sick. Maybe you
shift your focus from figuring out how to get the work done to figuring out how to
shunt the responsibility to someone else. Maybe you’ve learned to act the class
clown. Or you might have crafted other smoke screens to obscure the truth that
you’ve made no progress and have no idea how to start inching forward. Feeling
📒
 
What Rule 6 can do for you:
Bring the future a lot closer

184 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
helpless makes some adults with ADHD regress to relying on a willing helper to
cover for them by picking up the slack. Of course, none of these tactics helps you
get done what you need to get done. And none of them protects you forever from
others finding out that you haven’t fulfilled your obligations. Better to figure out
where you’re stymied most and use external motivators appropriate for those situ-
ations.
These are just a few simple questions to get you thinking about when you feel
blocked from moving forward on a project or goal. Reading about the following
strategies you can use to provide yourself with external motivation may bring up
more examples.
Strategy: Break down longer-term tasks or goals into much, much smaller
units or work quotas.
It’s so easy to lose sight of the end point of a project. If even an end-of-the-
day deadline seems remote to you, you’ll want to use this strategy for most work
goals and some household goals. If you have a big project—like cleaning out all
Do you panic or simply go blank when someone gives you a
deadline so distant you can’t even imagine that far ahead?
Where does this typically happen in your life?
Do complex projects overwhelm you?
What types do you usually have to tackle?
Do you have a lot of trouble working without supervision or
camaraderie?
Where and when?

Break It down . . . and Make It Matter 185
the closets in your house or preparing next year’s budget for your department
at work—this strategy will be even more crucial. And you’ll need to break the
project down even further. In fact, the longer a project will take to complete, the
more steps it’s likely to involve. The further the deadline, the more essential it is
to break it down and the smaller you need to make the chunks of work or other
actions required.
✓ If a project has to be done before the end of the day, break it into 1-hour or,
better yet, half-hour chunks of work. Write down what you need to get done in each
period of time and then run a highlighter over the step you’re working on right
now to keep your attention focused on that and off the rest of the units.
✓ If you have a project that has to be done by the end of the week, first figure out
how much you need to get done each day. With something like closet cleaning, this
can be as straightforward as assigning one day for each closet. If it’s something

now to keep your attention focused on that and off the rest of the units.
✓ If you have a project that has to be done by the end of the week, first figure out
how much you need to get done each day. With something like closet cleaning, this
can be as straightforward as assigning one day for each closet. If it’s something
more complex, where the tasks depend on each other, you may have to work a
little harder to figure out the appropriate sequence of steps. If you’re at work,
ask your boss or mentor to help you. Use other people’s reports of the same work
from the past; the office files, electronic or paper, should help. Talk to friendly
colleagues who have had to complete similar projects and see if their breakdown
could work for you.
Then look at the goal for each day and break it down into 1-hour or half-hour
segments. Or if, as is often true at work, you need to intersperse this project with
others, pick a time period to dedicate to this project, write it into your day planner
or the calendar on your desk, and then when the time comes break that period
into even smaller time segments during which you will complete each of the steps
for a certain task.
A classic example of this occurred during the 2016 Summer Olympics when
Michael Phelps, an adult with ADHD, was showcased on TV and the commenta-
tors were giving a lot of background about him. They showed his daily schedule,
which was broken into 15-minute units from the time he arose early in the morn-
ing until bedtime. It contained not just his planned training workouts for that day,
but even how much time he would give himself to eat meals, nap, and devote to
his favorite leisure activities.
You don’t necessarily have to plan your day to this degree, but it would help to
plan your time at work just like Michael did to help keep yourself focused on your
goals and work assignments. So, mark your day planner beforehand with how you
plan to spend each hour of that workday. Then break that hour into 15-minute
units, assigning each a microtask you hope to do that is part of the bigger project
in that unit. Doing this helps collapse what might seem like an endlessly long
project into a series of quick-moving bites of time and accomplishment.

186 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
✓ Keep in mind that the breaks between these chunks of time are just as impor-
tant as the productive periods. Don’t be embarrassed to think of yourself in the same
way you’d think of a young student with ADHD: You wouldn’t expect a child to
come home from school and do 30 math problems in one
sitting (nor would a good teacher expect that in the class-
room). You ask the child to try just five. When those five
are done, you let the child with ADHD take a break for a
minute or two. Then you give him just five more. Five at a
time is not overwhelming, even for someone with ADHD,
but 30 can be. Just do five at a time and do that six times in a row with short
breaks in between, and you’ve got your 30 problems done. I know several profes-
sional athletes with ADHD who use this tactic while doing their workouts or
weightlifting. Instead of saying they will bench-press a certain weight 30 times,
they specify 10, then say, “That was easy” and immediately do 10 more, and so on.
We all take “baby steps” toward any difficult goal. Why should you be any differ-
ent?
Strategy: Make yourself accountable
to someone else.
This strategy doubles your external motivators.

weightlifting. Instead of saying they will bench-press a certain weight 30 times,
they specify 10, then say, “That was easy” and immediately do 10 more, and so on.
We all take “baby steps” toward any difficult goal. Why should you be any differ-
ent?
Strategy: Make yourself accountable
to someone else.
This strategy doubles your external motivators.
Not only are you breaking down a complex or
extended project into smaller tasks, but now you’re
bringing another person into the mix, someone who
will know whether you’re doing what you set out to
do. We are far, far more likely to follow through on the goals
we set for ourselves if we tell someone else what we’re doing
and how we plan to do it (by chunking it, usually) and then
notify that person when we achieve each smaller objective.
Most of us care a great deal about what others think of us,
and this social judgment of others adds even more motiva-
tional fuel to our inner fires to get things done.
✓ At work, make yourself accountable to a supportive coworker, supervisor,
or mentor.
✓ At home, use a supportive partner, spouse, roommate, or neighbor.
Reward your helper. In the final strategy of Rule 6, you’ll learn how important
it is to reward yourself as an incentive to keep working toward your goals. Well,
Sign to post on your desk or
work area: CHUNK IT, BABY!
Making yourself accountable
brings in the internal motivator
of emotions too. Letting someone
else down doesn’t feel good;
receiving admiration feels great.
Make yourself accountable
to someone for reaching
each small subgoal and
also the final project goal.

Break It down . . . and Make It Matter 187
this goes for the person you’re asking to help you stay on track too. Thank and
reward this person so he or she doesn’t feel burdened by this process. A helper
who feels appreciated by you is likely to take satisfaction in helping you achieve
your goals. That person is also likely to want to keep being your coach and men-
tor.
Strategy: Give yourself little rewards as you accomplish each small objective.
When we design programs for children with ADHD, we invariably give
them points, tokens, poker chips, or some other reward for achieving the small
work quotas discussed above. This, along with praise and approval, helps them
get and stay motivated to finish drawn-out
work assignments. The same applies to adults,
except there is no teacher to dispense the
points or rewards. You have to do that for
yourself.
We all do this. While writing this chap-
ter, I told myself that if I wrote for 30 to 60
minutes and got five pages done, I would make
myself a cappuccino in our nearby kitchen.
Then if I did another five pages or more, I
could pick up my bass guitar, which I keep in
my office, and practice (yet one more time) a
sixties rock tune I am trying to master, but just
for a few minutes, one time through the song.
If I wrote five more pages, I could have a Her-
shey’s Kiss off the nearby coffee table or a can
of Diet Coke from my office fridge. Or I could just take a minute to appreciate the
beautiful view from my second-floor office window across a tidal creek and marsh
behind my home.
Use whatever turns you on; the lesson here is the same: Give yourself brief
little rewards for getting your small quotas done and then, brick by brick, you will
be amazed at just how much work gets done across the longer term. That’s how
I wrote this entire book—brick by brick. Or, as Anne Lamott put it in her book

Use whatever turns you on; the lesson here is the same: Give yourself brief
little rewards for getting your small quotas done and then, brick by brick, you will
be amazed at just how much work gets done across the longer term. That’s how
I wrote this entire book—brick by brick. Or, as Anne Lamott put it in her book
on writing, Bird by Bird: Her brother had to write a class paper on birds and could
not get started, so their father told him to just write a few sentences on one bird,
then come tell him about it, and so on, until the paper was finished. So, my friend,
take it bird by bird. Stop briefly to note your success and briefly reward it at the
end of each bird.
Ways to thank your mentor/
coach:
•
 
Take him out to lunch every
couple weeks
•
 
Bring a token gift periodically
•
 
Offer a small gift certificate
to a store she likes
•
 
Bring him his favorite coffee
or tea in the morning or soda
in the afternoon


188 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
Putting it all together: OK, so you have broken your work into smaller quotas,
chunking it all the way. Just as important as using smaller quotas to get bigger
ones accomplished is what you do once each chunk or quota is done. Do at least
these four things:
1. 
Congratulate yourself.
2. 
Take a short break (a few minutes).
3. 
If someone is available, tell him or her what you’ve gotten done.
4. 
Give yourself a reward or a taste of some privilege or activity you enjoy but
make it small and brief.
All three of these strategies are going to help motivate you to get things done
that you have not previously been able to finish or to get to those longer-term life
goals you really want to attain but never seem to get started on or complete. All
are ways to artificially motivate yourself. When visualizing, describing, and feeling
the emotions associated with completing a task are not enough to sustain your
focus . . .
✓ Chunk it.
✓ Make the goal and smaller quotas public.
✓ Take brief breaks.
✓ Reward yourself after each one.
Rule 7 will give you more ideas for making the external world boost your
internal motivation.
What small rewards could you easily give yourself?
At work:
At home:
Elsewhere:

189
22
Rule 7: Make Problems
External, Physical,
and Manual
If you typically get lost in all the possibilities when you try to mentally solve a
problem, Rule 7 is for you. Because your verbal and nonverbal working memory
capacities are weakened by ADHD, you probably find it challenging to hold all the
relevant facts in your mind when presented with a problem to be solved. Weighing
the pros and cons, listing the tools or materials you need, analyzing the merits of
various approaches, figuring out risk/benefit ratios—all of these operations are
difficult to carry out strictly in your head. It’s not that you’re incapable of logical
analysis or you lack intelligence—far from it. It’s just that you need to make the
process tangible and external to move through it smoothly and successfully. In
essence, you need to be able to use your senses to oil the gears of your mind:
✓ You need visual aids so you can scan all the facts and questions in front
of you.
✓ You need to be able to physically manipulate the information to make it
real and manageable.
✓ You need to make the problem external so that trying to solve it doesn’t
rely so much on your working memory—and so your emotions don’t erupt
with the frustration of trying to do it all in your head.

of you.
✓ You need to be able to physically manipulate the information to make it
real and manageable.
✓ You need to make the problem external so that trying to solve it doesn’t
rely so much on your working memory—and so your emotions don’t erupt
with the frustration of trying to do it all in your head.
📒
 
What Rule 7 can do for you:
Simplify problem solving

190 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
Know Where the Most Complicated or Urgent
Problems Come Up in Your Life
This is a tricky assessment to make. What’s hardest for you, the abstract problems
that come up at work or the emotion-laden issues you have to deal with at home?
Solving problems for yourself or solving them for others? Having to think on your
feet or having to systematically work through complicated options? Knowing
where you’re most paralyzed by problems will help you develop the external aids
most likely to make your life easier.
How successfully do you solve problems at work?
Which ones are toughest for you—budgeting, coworker
relationships, teamwork, dealing with supervisors, other issues?
How successfully do you solve problems at home?
With your spouse/partner?
With your kids?
With siblings?
With parents?
How successfully do you solve problems in your social life?
In dating?
With friends?
With neighbors and in community groups?
How successfully do you solve practical problems?
Repair needs (such as home or car)?
Shopping (such as dealing with store employees)?
With vendors (such as utility companies, credit card
companies)?

Make Problems external, Physical, and Manual 191
Know What Kinds of External Aids Help You Most
Most people have some sense of where their perceptual strengths are. For those
with ADHD, who need to rely comparatively more on their senses to assist their
thinking, it’s important to know:
Do you remember what it was like for you to try to solve problems in your
head when you were a child? Even the easiest mental arithmetic problems may
have been impossible for you to do. If so, you probably also remember how demor-
alizing it was to be denied the use of beads or other tokens because conventional
educational wisdom said that by your age you should have been able to do without
them.
Our studies have shown that difficulty solving problems in their head keeps
affecting people with ADHD as they get older, though in different ways.
Young children may have trouble with mental arithmetic. They may not be
able to recite backwards a string of digits read aloud to them. As they get
older, they can’t hold all the parts of a story in mind (characters, places, dates,
actions, and the like) as well as other adults when asked to explain the story
concisely or write a paper analyzing the story in some way. Our research
now shows that this problem affects adults with ADHD just as much.
What type of learner do you think you are?
Visual (you need to see the material laid out before you to
grasp it)?
Auditory (you need to hear it to have it make the most
sense)?
Tactile (you need to touch it to get a full sense of it)?
Kinesthetic (you learn best by moving around in a physical
activity)?

What type of learner do you think you are?
Visual (you need to see the material laid out before you to
grasp it)?
Auditory (you need to hear it to have it make the most
sense)?
Tactile (you need to touch it to get a full sense of it)?
Kinesthetic (you learn best by moving around in a physical
activity)?

192 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
Lots of people with ADHD have bad memories of experiences like that. For-
tunately, you’re an adult now, and no one can tell you what tools you’re allowed to
use to solve the problems that come your way. You have dozens at your disposal. If
they help you figure out where to spend your paycheck, how to talk your boss into
a raise when company funds are tight, how to get a term paper done on time, how
to keep the kids from bickering, or which home improvement project to tackle
first, it’s your obligation to use them.
We’re all supposed to develop verbal and nonverbal working memory during
childhood so that we can retain and call up mental images and so we can put
words to what we’ve experienced. Later in our development we should be able to
take those mental representations apart, manipulate them, move them around,
and recombine them in various ways. Doing so is critical to:
✓ Coming up with various options
✓ Solving problems
✓ Inventing various ways of doing or explaining things
✓ Generally developing plans for the future
Unfortunately, the problems ADHD causes in the brain rob us of the typical
development of these executive functions. So how can you compensate? Try this:
Strategy: Use physical, external tools to solve problems whenever you can.
Holding lots of information in your mind and manipulating it in various ways
without losing track of anything is a pretty sophisticated ability. It also requires a
fair amount of effort, energy, and concentration. Ask any adult who is trying to
figure out how to squeeze a little more income out of the same old paycheck to
fund braces or a new car at the same time as refereeing a fight between the kids
and trying to get dinner on the table—all after a 10-hour workday. Exhaustion has
a way of making mental problem solving almost impossible. I know many adults
who take advantage of their computer to make lists or use sticky notes or magnets
they can move around on a board, audiotapes, graphic devices, and other tools to
get the data out of their already-cluttered minds and put it somewhere else where
they can see it, feel it, hear it, or manipulate it. They use whatever it takes to give
themselves a fresh take on the problem at hand.
You can do the same. After all, you probably have the same demands on your
problem-solving abilities plus the interference of ADHD to deal with. Take all the
help you can get.
Once you have all the data pertinent to your problem in pieces—on paper,

Make Problems external, Physical, and Manual 193
using objects, or graphically represented in some other way—you can move all
that physically represented stuff around with your hands, your eyes, your ears,
even your whole body to see if a solution reveals itself. If it’s a verbal problem, use
paper, 3˝ × 5˝ file cards, or even a laptop computer.
Think of this as the “advanced” version of Rule 2. Rule 2 advised you to
externalize something you need to remember by writing it down, posting it on a
sign, or creating some other cue. Here in Rule 7 you extend the idea a bit further,
externalizing everything you need to consider to solve a problem. Doing this can

Think of this as the “advanced” version of Rule 2. Rule 2 advised you to
externalize something you need to remember by writing it down, posting it on a
sign, or creating some other cue. Here in Rule 7 you extend the idea a bit further,
externalizing everything you need to consider to solve a problem. Doing this can
be as simple as doodling on a piece of scratch paper or sketching various parts of
the problem as you think of them. There are lots of ways to make problems we’re
trying to solve physical in some way. Decorators make miniature two-dimensional
furnishings and work with various room arrangements on a plastic form board
in the shape of the room, house, or office. You can now buy computer software
programs that let you do the same thing. Engineers and architects use simulators
on computers all the time in designing roads, bridges, cars, or new chemicals and
solving physical problems of all sorts. Landscapers do the same sort of thing with
miniature props or computerized simulation programs. Carpenters, plumbers, tile
and brick layers, and people in other trades manually manipulate pieces of the
problem to be solved to get the job done. After all, isn’t that what blueprints are for
besides just instructing us in building something? We can tinker with the design
on the blueprint better than in our minds.
For example, one adult with ADHD I knew was building a house. He knew
that the kitchen was critical and needed to be designed properly as he and his
partner would be likely to use it. So he took old moving boxes and literally built
a mockup of their kitchen and its counters with these boxes. Then he walked
through it, pretending to do things like cook, unload groceries, get to the fridge,
and load the dishwasher. This allowed him to make critical readjustments to their
initial floor plan to better accommodate the ways in which they use their kitchen.
If you have ADHD, odds are you will be better at solving various problems or
completing various mental tasks if you can get them outside of you, broken down
into pieces or in some other physical form that you can work with manually in
addition to mentally. Try it. And if those around you raise their eyebrows as they
see you “playing” with these “toys,” invoke Rule 8.

194
23
Rule 8: Have a Sense
of Humor!
If you’re still having trouble owning your ADHD, Rule 8 is for you. There’s
nothing like a little self-deprecating humor to help all of us accept our imperfec-
tions, get over any self-consciousness about them, and get on
with the business—and pleasure—of living.
All the preceding chapters of this book are a testament to
just how serious a problem ADHD can be. You just know you
are going to make mistakes, probably far more than most people.
Having ADHD is certainly not your fault. So what can you do
about it? Besides everything you’ve learned so far, try this:
Strategy: Learn to say, with a smile, “Well, there goes my ADHD talking
[or acting up] again. Sorry about that. My mistake. Now I have to try to do
something about that next time.”
When you say this, you’ve done four very important things in a social situa-
tion:
✓ You owned the mistake.
✓ You explained how it may have happened.
📒
 
What Rule 8 can do for you:
Help you accept your imperfections
and get on with your life
ADHD may be serious,
but you don’t always
have to be.

something about that next time.”
When you say this, you’ve done four very important things in a social situa-
tion:
✓ You owned the mistake.
✓ You explained how it may have happened.
📒
 
What Rule 8 can do for you:
Help you accept your imperfections
and get on with your life
ADHD may be serious,
but you don’t always
have to be.

Have a Sense of Humor! 195
✓ You apologized and made no excuses by blaming others.
✓ You promised to try to do better next time.
Amazing what you can do with a few short phrases. Do those things and you
will keep your self-esteem and your friends and loved ones. Disown your ADHD
conduct, blame others, find excuses, and make no effort at trying to be better and
you will be social toast.
As we said in Step Two, know your ADHD, own it, and then work with it.
You have to do these things if you stand any chance of mastering your ADHD. So
don’t deny your imperfections. Know them, own them, admit to them easily, and
work with and laugh at them daily. That takes time to do. But then they become
no big deal—and they won’t likely be so again.
I still remind friends of 42 years whom I trained with as an intern in psychol-
ogy—and they certainly still remind me—of the hound’s-tooth black and white
leisure suit I wore to a clinic one day at our medical school while training as an
intern. And we all still laugh until we get tears in our eyes about what came to be
known as a “full Cleveland” because I accented the outfit with a white belt and
white shoes.
My ex-wife will tell you repeatedly with little encouragement of how I once did
a cartwheel into a large hot tub at a spa resort in front of numerous attractive young
ladies as I tried to enter the pool without using the railing or stairs. So much for
graceful coordination. And just don’t ask her about all the stop signs I have nearly
run or actually missed due to my color blindness when those signs were in front of
green bushes. And what of all the public speaking, newspaper photos, professional
videos, TV programs, and other public displays I have been involved in that show
my ever more balding and graying head, facial wrinkles, and those gold crowns that
twinkle in the photo from the camera flash when I am caught smiling? I own every
last one of these imperfections and then some. So? I like who I am, warts and all,
I want to be a part of life, I have goals yet to achieve, and I intend to live this life
as fully as time and opportunity permit, nonetheless. So should you. As one adult
with ADHD told me, “I want to go sliding into my grave and know that I lived a
meaningful life rather than slouch toward my final ending.”
We want you to take much the same attitude toward your ADHD: You have
it, so you might as well own up to it. And, whenever appropriate, laugh about it.
It may be appropriate to laugh at yourself apologetically with others. It’s almost
always appropriate to have a private laugh at yourself. If you make ADHD a seri-
ous, all-encompassing disability, it will be, and that’s the way others will treat
it—and probably not want to spend much time with you. If you approach it with
a sense of humor, they will too, and you can laugh with them about it (and about
their imperfections too!). They’ll probably end up wanting to spend more time
with you as a friend.

ous, all-encompassing disability, it will be, and that’s the way others will treat
it—and probably not want to spend much time with you. If you approach it with
a sense of humor, they will too, and you can laugh with them about it (and about
their imperfections too!). They’ll probably end up wanting to spend more time
with you as a friend.

196 CHAnGe YouR LIFe
Most important, though, you’ll be able to live with yourself—with all your
imperfections and all your struggles to deal with a condition that’s not easy to
live with. Treatment won’t cure it or even address all of it, and therefore ADHD
is most likely going to be with you for the rest of your life. So get used to it and
smile about it once in a while. As great examples find Dani Donovan’s artwork
about ADHD and the videos of Jessica McCabe and Rick Green about the humor
in ADHD, both available on the Internet, including Rick’s original video, ADHD
and Loving It, about ADHD and marriage.
To help you remember these eight everyday rules, photocopy this page and
tape these rules to your bathroom mirror. I did this for years with Stephen Covey’s
7 Habits of Highly Effective People. I got to see and relearn them every morning. I
know many others who did the same until they had memorized and could easily
recite those fantastic principles for leading a productive, effective, and purposeful
life of integrity. So, put these eight rules where you can see them every day, even
keeping a second copy on your desk at work, another in your day planner, another
taped beside your computer monitor, and copies in other places you are bound to
be looking at repeatedly each day.
Rule 1: Stop the Action!
Buy some time before you respond.
Rule 2: See the Past . . . and Then the Future
See what’s coming.
Rule 3: Say the Past . . . and Then the Future
Analyze before deciding; develop rules for the future.
Rule 4: Externalize Key Information
Rely on something besides your memory.
Rule 5: Feel the Future
Stay motivated.
Rule 6: Break It Down . . . and Make It Matter
Bring the future a lot closer.
Rule 7: Make Problems External, Physical, and Manual
Simplify problem solving.
Rule 8: Have a Sense of Humor!
Accept your imperfections and get on with your life.

197
Step Five
Change
Your Situation
Mastering AdHd in Specific
Areas of Your Life
Take a quick look at the bar chart on the next page. It shows that adults with
ADHD reported being impaired in every area of life, much more than adults with-
out ADHD. These findings are probably no surprise to you. Self-control and a
sense of time are critical to everything you do, everywhere you go. When they are
hampered by ADHD, you feel it in every aspect of your daily existence.
Some activities and situations may be harder for you than others. If so, you
might want to start Step Five by reading the chapters on the domains where you
have the greatest ADHD-related difficulties. Or skim the chapters to see what
they have to offer. You’ll find a wealth of practical ideas for handling the specific
demands of specific settings, all flowing from the rules in Step Four and all target-
ing the unique deficits associated with ADHD.

might want to start Step Five by reading the chapters on the domains where you
have the greatest ADHD-related difficulties. Or skim the chapters to see what
they have to offer. You’ll find a wealth of practical ideas for handling the specific
demands of specific settings, all flowing from the rules in Step Four and all target-
ing the unique deficits associated with ADHD.

198 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
From ADHD in Adults: What the Science Says by Russell A. Barkley, Kevin R. Murphy, and Mariel-
len Fischer. Copyright © 2008 The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission.

199
24
Education
“My teachers in school were always telling me to read the directions on my school
assignments carefully so I would know exactly what I was supposed to do. But,
oh no, not me. I would always just lunge right into the work, figuring that I had a
pretty clear idea of what I was to do. And so I would get a lot of my assignments
wrong. I just could not seem to slow down and take the time to read the directions.
I just wanted to get the work over with as fast as possible.”
“I initially failed out of college for not doing my coursework. So I worked for 3
years, and then I returned to a community college and got my associate’s degree.
I finally transferred back to my original university, gaining acceptance back into
the engineering school, from which I hope to graduate this year. But even that is
not guaranteed, because I still have these unfinished papers to turn in for classes
that already ended.”
There’s probably nothing harder for people with ADHD than getting an educa-
tion. That goes for both children and adults. ADHD impairs academic perfor-
mance, it leads to behavior problems in school, and it reduces the number of years
of education completed successfully.
I may be giving you information you’ve already gathered firsthand. If so, you
probably also know already that lack of a good education has a lot of downstream
or knock-on effects. It lowers your earning potential, both annually and across
your lifetime. It limits your choice of occupation. It can influence the kinds of
friends you may have and the social circles in which you participate. It can leave
you with low self-esteem, which can further hamper your social life.
Now that you’re on track toward changing your destiny, you may find that
you want to go back to school. If you don’t have a high school diploma or a col-
lege degree, perhaps you’ve decided to get a GED and/or enroll in college. With
the help you get from medication, you may feel confident that you could complete
a training program, seminar, workshop, adult education program, or continuing
education course to give your career a boost. Or maybe you’re a young adult and

200 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
still in the midst of your higher education. On the following pages I’ll share a lot
of practical tips for being as successful as you can possibly be, whatever your edu-
cational goals may be.
But first, you might benefit from having some idea of what you’re up against
so that you’re prepared to seek any accommodations or assistance you might need.
Why devote time and energy to education without giving yourself the best pos-
sible chance to succeed?
Know What You’re Up Against
You can enhance your educational achievements through a number of routes,
from medication to accommodations provided by the school to self-help strategies.
Your best bet for targeting the aids tailored to meet your unique needs is to know

Why devote time and energy to education without giving yourself the best pos-
sible chance to succeed?
Know What You’re Up Against
You can enhance your educational achievements through a number of routes,
from medication to accommodations provided by the school to self-help strategies.
Your best bet for targeting the aids tailored to meet your unique needs is to know
as much as you can about your own abilities.
Have You Had ADHD Since Childhood?
If so, you’ve been struggling in school from the start. My colleagues and I have
found that adults with ADHD who were diagnosed as children tend to have done
worse in school than those diagnosed as adults. Why? It’s hard to say for certain,
but here are some possibilities:
✓ Some people who have gone through childhood without a diagnosis or
treatment may have milder ADHD than those diagnosed at an early age.
✓ Those who managed without treatment may have had superlative indi-
vidual support from parents and teachers.
✓ In some cases, high intelligence can compensate for ADHD symptoms in
school just enough to make the adults in a child’s life think a diagnosis is
unnecessary.
For these reasons a child might remain undiagnosed and might be more suc-
cessful in school than diagnosed children whose problems were so apparent that
they led to early referral and diagnosis. When those bright children grow up, they
often end up seeking help for ADHD. By adulthood parental support is no longer
available to the same extent. And, as you read in Step One, the symptoms affect
domains of life where intelligence can’t overcome impairments, so the adult gets
tired of trying to manage life with untreated ADHD symptoms.
So, if you were diagnosed as a child, you’re probably facing more obstacles
than if you were diagnosed recently. If your ADHD was relatively severe, you’re

education 201
dealing with greater deficits to begin with. On top of that, problems in school tend
to build on each other over time. Both your performance and your self-confidence
may have dropped over the years. It’s important to know that so you can seek the
degree of assistance you need to achieve your educational goals.
Do You Have Learning Disabilities?
A substantial minority of adults with ADHD also have specific learning disabili-
ties (LDs). An LD is a delay in a specific area of basic academic skills, such as
reading, spelling, math, and reading comprehension. You read in Step Two that
the executive function deficits of ADHD can cause reading comprehension prob-
lems. But these problems are more striking in some people than others. If you
score below the 14th percentile on standardized tests, you might be said to have
a specific LD.
We know from research that these LDs are more common in adults with
ADHD than in the general population. We’ve found particular problems in not
just reading comprehension but also listening comprehension. Whether you qual-
ified for a specific LD or fell just below that cutoff line, it’s not hard to see how
In recent research, my colleagues and I found the following in studies exam-
ining the educational history of both people diagnosed as adults and people
diagnosed as children. The information on those diagnosed as adults came
from the reports of people who knew them well as kids, mainly their parents.
The information on those diagnosed as children came from a study I did with
Mariellen Fischer, PhD, that followed children with ADHD in Wisconsin into

diagnosed as children. The information on those diagnosed as adults came
from the reports of people who knew them well as kids, mainly their parents.
The information on those diagnosed as children came from a study I did with
Mariellen Fischer, PhD, that followed children with ADHD in Wisconsin into
adulthood (average age 27 years), at which time they still had the disorder.
School outcome
Adults with
ADHD (%)
Children with ADHD
as adults (%)
Graduated from high school 
88 62
Graduated from college 
30 9
Retained in grade 
25 47
Received special education 
35 65
Received other assistance 
48 42

202 Change Your Situation
challenging learning would be if you couldn’t grasp or retain what you’d read or
heard in the classroom as well as your peers! An LD could also have a negative
impact on your social life if others didn’t realize you were having trouble under-
standing what they were saying and misinterpreted your reaction as lack of inter-
est in them. Fortunately, even if any LDs you may have were not addressed when
you were a child, you can get targeted help for them today.
Lay the Groundwork for Learning
The vast majority of adults with ADHD have experienced problems in their edu-
cational history. Besides the figures quoted above, our studies showed that adults
with ADHD were more likely to have been punished at school (42% among those
just diagnosed—a whopping 62% among those diagnosed as kids). They had more
problems with others at school (44% and 53%, respectively). A huge 71% of adults
diagnosed as children had been suspended or expelled at least once. Obviously,
you’re not looking to repeat that kind of experience. Yet you’re likely to have
problems again if you’re pursuing adult education classes or workplace educational
programs. You can do yourself a big favor by knowing what you can do to get
around those problems.
You’re Entitled to Reasonable Accommodations
If you’re still in college, you’ll probably need certain accommodations to help you
succeed. And you should have them. You are entitled to reasonable adjustments
to your educational activities as provided under the Americans with Disabilities
Act. You may want to become familiar with the requirements for documenting
your ADHD for your college if you wish to take advantage of these reasonable
accommodations.
The same studies cited above showed that adults diagnosed with ADHD as
children had more learning disabilities than adults diagnosed as adults:
School outcome
Adults with
ADHD (%)
Children with ADHD
as adults (%)
Diagnosed learning disorder 
28 45

education 203
Please keep in mind, though, that this law
exists to help you help yourself. No accommoda-
tions can do the hard work of learning for you.
Assert your right to accommodations, but don’t
stop there. Always be prepared to do whatever
you can for yourself. You’ll do much better in
school if you do, and what you learn from help-
ing yourself will transfer to every other setting
you function in, from work to home.
Learn the Eight Everyday Rules for Success
Following the rules laid out in Step Four is one big way to help yourself. In educa-
tional settings, these rules should be your bible.
Medication
In all honesty, experience and much research tell us that self-help recommenda-
tions like these rules are often not enough by themselves to master the adverse
effects of your ADHD at school. If you’ve been coasting along without medication

tional settings, these rules should be your bible.
Medication
In all honesty, experience and much research tell us that self-help recommenda-
tions like these rules are often not enough by themselves to master the adverse
effects of your ADHD at school. If you’ve been coasting along without medication
but are considering going back to school or starting a challenging job, now is the
time to reconsider this treatment. ADHD medications are the most effective way
to begin to address the school and workplace problems that ADHD poses for most
adults.
You’ll probably find the long-acting ADHD medications most
useful since they can manage your symptoms for 8–14 hours with
only one or two doses a day. You may benefit from supplementing a
single dose of the long-acting medications with a second dose of an
immediate-release pill late in the day or in the early evening.
Find a Coach or Mentor
This is someone to whom you can make yourself accountable every
day for the work that you believe needs to get done that day. This
can be a teacher, professor, roommate, classmate, more senior stu-
dent, or someone in the special student services office. If possible,
meet with your coach twice a day for 5 minutes. Use the first meet-
ing, usually in the morning, to review your to-do list or goals for
that day. Then meet again late in the day to show your coach what you’ve accom-
plished on that list.
See
Step Three
for details on
medications.

More on
accountability
in Chapter 21.

See the Resources for books
that explain your protections
under the Americans with
Disabilities Act, the documentation
you’ll have to provide, and the
types of accommodations that
might be available.


204 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
Identify the College ADHD Liaison
This person, who usually works in the special student services office, can do the
following for you:
✓ Review your documentation that you have ADHD
✓ Describe the types of curriculum adjustments and other accommodations
typically provided to students with ADHD so you can identify the ones
you might need
✓ Work with your professors to see that you get them
✓ Link you up with psychologists, counselors, and physicians (usually psy-
chiatrists) who work at the student counseling center
Get Tools That Can Keep You on Track before You Begin
✓ Use a daily assignment calendar to set goals for each day and track appoint-
ments. You’ll use this calendar to review the day’s tasks with your coach and also
keep it in a visible spot to remind you to stay focused on your goals and appoint-
ments.
✓ Use your journal to write down everything you need to do,
including assignments, individual requests made of you by teach-
ers, meetings you’ve scheduled, promises you’ve made or that
others have made to you—anything of the slightest importance.
Review this journal several times a day to make sure you’re doing
the things you have recorded there.
✓ Get a notebook organizing system and day planners and use a personal time
management or organizing app too if it will help you stay organized. (But be aware
that smartphones and other such devices can also be incredibly distracting and
markedly reduce your productivity due to text messaging, e-mail, or just surfing
the Internet for fun. Think twice about using them—they don’t always help dis-
tractible people.)
✓ Buy separate, colored folders for each class, where you can
keep your completed assignments. It’s not unusual for adults with

markedly reduce your productivity due to text messaging, e-mail, or just surfing
the Internet for fun. Think twice about using them—they don’t always help dis-
tractible people.)
✓ Buy separate, colored folders for each class, where you can
keep your completed assignments. It’s not unusual for adults with
ADHD to do assignments and then misplace them and not be able
to turn them in on time.
✓ Get a tactile cueing device that can provide frequent prompts
to keep you focused on the work at hand. One possibility is the
MotivAider, a small plastic box about the size of your cell phone
See
Chapter 19 for
tips on making
the most of
your journal.

One place
to get the
MotivAider is
amazon.com
.


education 205
that holds a small vibrator and a digital clock that can either be set for any interval
you wish or set to random intervals so that it vibrates unpredictably.
Tips for Success
Scheduling Smart
✓ Schedule harder classes/meetings/work in your “peak performance” time
slot each day. For most people, this may be midmorning or early afternoon, but
people vary in the time of day when they’re most alert. Some research shows that
adults with ADHD find afternoons or even evening hours their best time to focus
and concentrate, which is a few hours later than for adults in the general popu-
lation. In any case, know your daily cycle of arousal and alertness and use that
knowledge to schedule those tasks that require more concentration and effort into
the best time slot.
✓ Alternate required or harder courses with elective or fun classes during
the day or across the weekly schedule of your classes. You don’t want to stack up
all the hard classes on a single day or during the first few days of the week as this
can overtax you, make you too tired to do well in them, cause you to lose inter-
est or motivation partway through them, and ruin your attitude toward school.
Interspersing the hard stuff with classes or activities you find more interesting or
entertaining, or just exercise workouts, ensures that you’re never faced with too
many classes or projects that demand lots of effort too close together. You can do
this at work as well by arranging your work so that you alternate difficult/demand-
ing with easy/interesting tasks on a given day.
Getting the Most Out of Classes
✓ Tape or digitally record important lectures or meetings
or use the Smartpen digital recorder.
✓ Get any extra curriculum materials your teachers
may have available or have set aside at the library especially
for their classes, such as videos that supplement what you’re
learning in class and additional notes or articles that further
explain the topics that are being covered.
✓ Some adults with ADHD in college settings have been able to get assis-
tance with note taking in class if their writing problems are particularly severe.
✓ One way to stay awake, alert, and focused is to do something more active
while you have to pay attention. If you have to write down the gist of what is
For information
on the Smartpen,
which records as
you take notes, see
livescribe.com
.


tance with note taking in class if their writing problems are particularly severe.
✓ One way to stay awake, alert, and focused is to do something more active
while you have to pay attention. If you have to write down the gist of what is
For information
on the Smartpen,
which records as
you take notes, see
livescribe.com
.


206 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
being said in a lecture, you are more likely to stay attentive than if you just sit and
observe. Take notes continuously, keeping your hand moving, even if you don’t
really need to write down the information.
✓ Exercise before exams or boring classes. Routine aerobic exercise makes
a person able to concentrate for 45–60 minutes longer than usual directly after-
ward. Learn to build in brief exercise breaks throughout your day, especially before
you have to do something that you find difficult to concentrate on. Just 3–5 min-
utes of exercise may be enough to help you concentrate better. If the class is long
enough that you’re being given beverage or restroom breaks, use them to do some
quick aerobic exercise, even if it’s just faster than normal walking outside the
building or in the hallway.
✓ Use small-muscle exercises while engaged in boring classes or studying.
Repeatedly squeeze a tennis or stress ball, tap your feet while studying, chew on
some gum or even a rubber toy of some kind, or pace while you read. Any move-
ment seems to be helpful to adults with ADHD when they need to concentrate
on some task.
Handling Homework
✓ Use your computer rather than writing out papers and other assignments
by hand. People with ADHD often have motor coordination or other handwrit-
ing problems that make handwriting slower and less legible. In college, you may
also be able to tape or digitally record some of your assignments and turn in the
recording as your report if you have a history of significant writing problems. The
special student services counselor mentioned above can get you this type of cur-
riculum adjustment with your teachers if you require it.
✓ If you have lots of reading to do for school or work, learn to use the SQ4R
method for reading comprehension. Here, briefly, is how it works:
• 
Survey the material to be read—just leaf through it quickly to get some
idea of how much is to be read, how it is broken up, and so forth.
• 
Draft some questions that need to be answered from what you are to
read. Often these are at the end of the chapter to be read or have been
given to you by your teacher.
• 
Now use the 4Rs: Read just one paragraph, recite out loud in a soft
voice or whisper what was important in that material, write that mate-
rial down in your notebook, then review what you just wrote.
• 
Do this for each paragraph. This not only makes you review what you’re

education 207
reading four times per paragraph (read, recite, write, review) but also
gives you frequent mental breaks as you shift your concentration at the
end of each paragraph from reading to reciting to writing to reviewing
across the assignment. As you get good at this, you can read longer
passages, such as two paragraphs at a time or an entire page, before
engaging in the recite, write, and review steps. This is a great strategy
for people with working memory problems.
Passing the Test
✓ Should you request extra time on timed tests? Many young adults with
ADHD in college settings believe or have heard from others that this may be a

passages, such as two paragraphs at a time or an entire page, before
engaging in the recite, write, and review steps. This is a great strategy
for people with working memory problems.
Passing the Test
✓ Should you request extra time on timed tests? Many young adults with
ADHD in college settings believe or have heard from others that this may be a
useful accommodation to request. But what little research there is on the subject
is not that clear. Everyone, disabled or not, seems to benefit from extra time to
take timed tests, but that does not mean it will necessarily help compensate for
your ADHD or solve your problem with taking these tests. More recent opinion
suggests that you’re better off using a method called “time off the clock.” This
involves using a stopwatch to take these timed tests. With this stopwatch you will
not get any more time to take the test than do other students, say 1 or 2 hours.
But what you are allowed to do is to stop the watch anytime you like, as often as
you like, to take a short break of a minute or two. Use this to stand up, stretch,
walk about the room or into the hallway, get a drink of water, use the bathroom;
then return to your test and start the stopwatch. When you’ve used up all the test
time on the stopwatch, you’re done. Yes, this will result in your taking more time
than others to complete the test, but that is just a by-product of the real accom-
modation here, which is self-pacing the exam. You’re not given more active work
or face time with the exam than anyone else. The strategy that you’re using is the
point here: breaking up the test into smaller work quotas and having frequent self-
determined breaks to briefly refresh your mental focus and concentration.
✓ Take timed tests in test settings that are free of distractions or offer greatly
reduced chances of being distracted.
An Extra Boost
✓ Try some peer tutoring—this is where you and a fellow student agree to
study together and alternate teaching each other the material. One of you
is the instructor, the other the student. Then reverse these roles with each
tutoring session.
✓ Work as a team with more organized people. Working around or with

208 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
others who do not have ADHD can keep you better focused on the work
and more publicly accountable for doing that work than going solo.
✓ Find a fall-back college classmate who will fill you in if you’ve forgotten
an assignment or other important information. Swap phone numbers and
e-mail addresses so that you can get the lost or missing information quickly
when you find yourself in a jam.
The Healthy Student
Besides contributing to your overall health, the following two suggestions
can enhance your academic performance:
1. 
Watch the caffeine and nicotine use. You’re more prone than
other students to use these substances and become dependent on them.
Adults with ADHD sometimes try to self-medicate their disorder using readily
available caffeine-containing beverages or tobacco products. Yes, caffeine
and nicotine are stimulants and can help people be more alert. But caffeine,
especially, works on the wrong brain neurochemicals for people with ADHD
and can, in moderate or high doses, be counterproductive, making you less
focused, more jumpy and jittery, more nervous, and more likely to need to
urinate frequently. You are better off using a prescription ADHD drug than
trying to use caffeine-containing substances or over-the-counter pills that

especially, works on the wrong brain neurochemicals for people with ADHD
and can, in moderate or high doses, be counterproductive, making you less
focused, more jumpy and jittery, more nervous, and more likely to need to
urinate frequently. You are better off using a prescription ADHD drug than
trying to use caffeine-containing substances or over-the-counter pills that
contain this substance. And, while nicotine may benefit your ADHD symp-
toms to some degree, you’re using a highly addictive drug to self-medicate,
one that is only going to increase your addiction to this chemical, not to
mention increasing your risk for pulmonary and heart disease and cancer.
Again, use a prescription ADHD drug instead that does not carry such risks
and works just as well or even better.
2. 
Develop a regular weekly exercise routine (three or more times
per week) for increased attention, better health, stress management, and so
forth. Regular routine physical exercise done three to four times per week,
even for just 20–30 minutes each time, is good for anyone’s health. But if
you have ADHD, it also seems to be of particular benefit in further controlling
your symptoms or compensating for them. So whether it’s running, biking,
weight training, dance classes, using your favorite gym equipment (such as
treadmills, elliptical trainers, stair-climbers), or some mixture of various types
of exercise, you, more than most people, need to be doing routine physical
exercise.

education 209
✓ Attend any after-class help sessions that are offered. Many teachers are
willing to set aside extra time to help people who need more instruc-
tion. Take teachers up on these offers even if you don’t really need the
assistance. The extra review will help with your forgetfulness, and it will
also show you’re motivated, which will make a better impression on your
instructors.
✓ Schedule faculty or adviser review meetings often—every 3–6 weeks.
Remember that the more often you’re held accountable for your work, the
better you’ll do.

210
25
Work
“I was so active as a child, my teachers used to tell my mother to ‘just keep her busy’
because I was always getting into things if I was left alone or without anything to
do. I still find it very difficult to stay seated for very long, especially during boring
meetings or when I have to do work that doesn’t interest me. I just have to be doing
something, and if there is anything more interesting or fun to do than the work I’ve
been assigned, I’m likely to get distracted by it and find myself not getting things
done on time.”
“I have to put in five to ten times more effort at work to do what other people seem
to do so easily. By the end of the day at work, I’m exhausted and haven’t accom-
plished half of what other people seem to have done that day. Yet I seem to be more
tired than they are. What’s with me, anyway?”
“I’m in my mid-30s and have a long-held belief that I may be affected by adult
attention deficit disorder of the predominantly inattentive type. I have long suf-
fered a feeling of being different, a feeling that something is not right with me. For
a while I thought I may have ADHD, but I’m not fidgety or restless, though I find
it very difficult to concentrate and focus on any kind of task assigned to me. While
this resulted in much lower grades than I believed I was capable of in school and a
feeling that I was ‘just not that smart,’ it has affected me in a much more serious

a while I thought I may have ADHD, but I’m not fidgety or restless, though I find
it very difficult to concentrate and focus on any kind of task assigned to me. While
this resulted in much lower grades than I believed I was capable of in school and a
feeling that I was ‘just not that smart,’ it has affected me in a much more serious
way during my working life. I am very disorganized and frequently make careless
and silly mistakes at work (as I am a mechanical engineer, these can be very costly
financially and in regard to my own safety). I struggle to follow instructions, forget
where I have put things, and in general have trouble paying attention. These things
have led me to feel like a failure at work, and after several attempts to leave my
area of work I have embarked on other pursuits that have ended in the same feeling
of hopelessness and failure.”

Work 211
Back in the 1990s, research that looked at how ADHD affected teenagers
at work concluded that they did pretty much as well as other teenagers. Maybe,
it seemed, the symptoms interfered mainly in educational settings and we didn’t
need to worry so much about jobs.
We now know that’s not true. As attested by the last quote above, ADHD
can hurt you even more at work than it has at school. The problem with those
25-year-old studies is that they failed to take into account the types of jobs ado-
lescents usually hold: unskilled, part-time, and temporary. Working at a local rec
center, fast-food joint, or car wash doesn’t demand a lot of attention, thought,
or persistence. Maybe ADHD really wouldn’t interfere much in those entry-level
occupations.
But when scientists looked at the transition to full-time jobs, a different pic-
ture began to emerge. Adults with ADHD were found to change jobs more often
and to have more trouble meeting the demands of their jobs, working indepen-
dently, finishing tasks, and getting along with the boss. They were fired or laid off
more often than adults without ADHD.
The adults who had the biggest problems with ADHD in the workplace were
those who were hyperactive. Makes sense, doesn’t it? Teachers might cut you some
slack for being fidgety and restless at school because you’re either a growing little
kid or a hormone-fired teenager. Once you’re in the workplace, those who are
paying you to be there expect you to stay at your desk or machinery or other work-
station to get your work done. Employees who can’t are often labeled slackers and
eventually let go.
How much ADHD hinders you at work may depend on the severity of your
symptoms, whether they include hyperactivity as just noted, how little emotional
control you manifest, and whether you’re getting the treatment that the engineer
quoted above wasn’t. It can also depend on factors like these:
✓ The type of work you do
✓ Whether you’re getting any accommodations or supports on the job
✓ How much ADHD prevented you from building the skills and knowledge
as a child that we all need in the adult world
Finding the Right Job for You
It’s important to have a job where you get as much of what you need to succeed
as you possibly can:

✓ Whether you’re getting any accommodations or supports on the job
✓ How much ADHD prevented you from building the skills and knowledge
as a child that we all need in the adult world
Finding the Right Job for You
It’s important to have a job where you get as much of what you need to succeed
as you possibly can:

212 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
✓ Are there jobs you should favor over others because of your symptoms?
✓ Is one type of workplace better for you than others?
✓ Is the work you’ll do as important as the environment in which you’ll be
doing it?
These are questions you should try to answer whether you’re just entering the
workforce or you already have a job. Naturally there are no easy answers. (Sorry.)
But you’ll be on the right track if you start by knowing what you’re up against
and also what you have to offer. If your ADHD includes hyperactivity, a job that
requires you to plant yourself in a chair in front of a computer all day is not likely
to be ideal. You might toss out any thoughts of becoming an accountant. If your
downfall is not being able to finish even short tasks without close supervision, you
won’t want to become a lone wolf traveling salesperson or a telecommuter working
from a home office.
But these are points to consider more than they are firm rules. I know many
adults with ADHD who have chosen a job or a field that on the surface doesn’t
seem ideal for the strengths and weaknesses normally associated with the condi-
tion or with their particular version of it. Yet they do as well as most people. How?
They get support from a supervisor. They’ve been given the go-ahead and the
resources to adapt the workplace and working procedures to their needs. They
demonstrate a commitment to building their skills, using principles like the rules
in Step Four and strategies like those you’ll find in this chapter. They have a
strong inherent love for the type of work they chose to do. They take medication
that greatly reduces the impact of their symptoms—particularly critical if hyper-
activity or impulsivity is a problem for you.
The engineer whose story you heard at the beginning of this chapter may
have chosen what seemed like the best type of work for himself. He may have been
attracted to engineering because of a strength in math and graphics—seeing and
manipulating objects instead of reading words. Maybe he knew that this is the
type of work that absorbs him. If your ADHD sometimes makes it hard for you to
wrench yourself away from activities you enjoy, choosing one of those activities for
your career is not a bad approach.
Unfortunately, this engineer couldn’t succeed. Maybe that was because doing
well in a job is never just about the work you do. It also has to do with getting
along with your boss and your coworkers. It involves having a physical environ-
ment that’s conducive to focusing despite the distractibility of ADHD. It depends
on your knowing what types of tasks and situations are hardest for you and adapt-
ing them so you can deal with them. It may also hinge on whether the work hours

along with your boss and your coworkers. It involves having a physical environ-
ment that’s conducive to focusing despite the distractibility of ADHD. It depends
on your knowing what types of tasks and situations are hardest for you and adapt-
ing them so you can deal with them. It may also hinge on whether the work hours

Work 213
overlap with your most alert periods of the day. That may mean finding a sympa-
thetic, supportive organization that will accommodate your needs to some extent.
But it most certainly means taking responsibility for using the resources available
to you outside of what the company is willing to offer and making a commitment
to owning and working with your ADHD.
Our engineer said he couldn’t concentrate on conversations and couldn’t
form lasting, healthy relationships. Undoubtedly that made it hard for him to
cultivate cooperation among his coworkers and to enlist the aid of his supervi-
sor in identifying and preventing those “silly mistakes” he was always making.
Maybe he also worked in a busy, noisy office that made it hard to focus. Perhaps
he didn’t have the storage space to organize his materials so he wouldn’t forget
things.
Because he hasn’t been diagnosed with ADHD, this engineer can’t officially
request accommodations (and isn’t receiving the benefit of medication). But he
might have found an engineering job at a smaller company or looked for a gener-
ally subdued environment. He might have looked for an office designed with pri-
vate, relatively soundproof workspaces. A company that would pair him up with
an assistant or partner who could do the face-to-face contact work for him might
have spared him the embarrassment of communication gaffes.
Realistically, we can’t all pick and choose among a number of job opportuni-
ties, especially if the job market happens to be tight. That’s why it’s important to
map as many different routes to success as you can. Know what type of work might
keep you interested and be doable every day. Figure out what type of environment
is one in which you’re likely to thrive. Know what types of work procedures will
keep you on track and which ones will throw you off. Figure out what types of
people will inspire, and possibly help, you to succeed. Then do your best to find as
many of these favorable elements as you can in any job you consider. For most
adults with ADHD, finding the right job will be a matter of identifying the right
mix of the work you do (including the procedures) and the environment (includ-
ing the people) you’ll be doing it in. Challenges in one can be offset by benefits in
the other.
The way many people find such a match is, unfortunately,
through trial and error. That process can be painful if it doesn’t
lead fairly quickly to a good fit. So another route to consider is to
find a professional life coach or vocational counselor who works with
people who have ADHD. This person can at least help you define
your needs accurately. A coach can also help you identify lines of
work that might be good for you. And a coach can train you in job
interviewing—research has shown that adults with ADHD don’t
interview as well as other adults either.
See the
Resources for
information on
how to locate
a life coach.


your needs accurately. A coach can also help you identify lines of
work that might be good for you. And a coach can train you in job
interviewing—research has shown that adults with ADHD don’t
interview as well as other adults either.
See the
Resources for
information on
how to locate
a life coach.


214 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
The Type of Work
Some jobs are by nature more ADHD-friendly than others. For instance, these
occupations have proven better for some of my adult patients and may be ADHD-
friendlier than others:
✓ The military—The military ensures greater structure and discipline,
more immediate feedback, and greater provision of benefits (like medical care and
dental care) than other fields.
✓ Door-to-door (or B-to-B) sales—This type of job is often a good fit for
adults with ADHD, whether it is door to door, direct to consumer, or business to
business. That is because it involves freedom of movement, changes in setting,
mobility, a flexible schedule, frequent meetings with new contacts, opportunities
for social interaction, and passion for the product, and a value is put on being
talkative. Often adults with ADHD need some assistance back at the home office
with completing reports and paperwork, but while “in the field” they seem to do
well.
✓ Drug rep—Individuals with at least a BA degree in biology, nursing, med-
icine, pharmaceuticals, or a related field may find this calling perfect for all of the
same reasons given for door-to-door sales.
✓ Carpenter, plumber, electrician, landscaper, tile layer, roofer, con-
struction contractor—These and other trades may be more ADHD-friendly
because the individual is doing more manual than mental work, is outdoors more
often, has frequent changes in job sites, gets to deal with a lot of different people,
and is paid an hourly wage, which provides for more immediate consequences
than a salaried position with its less frequent paycheck.
✓ Emergency medical technician, emergency room physician, police
officer, firefighter—Like the jobs above, these occupations do not keep people
confined to offices or require hours of sustained mental effort or concentration.
They also provide some excitement and thrills, and even life-threatening situ-
ations that can provide the burst of adrenaline some adults with ADHD claim
helps them focus their mind in a crisis. Again, greater freedom of movement,
changes in work settings, and greater interaction with others may combine with
the sensation-producing nature of these jobs to make them more friendly to those
with ADHD. It is not that people with ADHD are better than others at handling
crises, but that in a crisis the person with ADHD is at no disadvantage because
there is little or no preparation needed to deal with the situation—after all, that
is the definition of a crisis (an unexpected yet serious event).
✓ Sports—Some talented athletes have found that ADHD does not exact

with ADHD. It is not that people with ADHD are better than others at handling
crises, but that in a crisis the person with ADHD is at no disadvantage because
there is little or no preparation needed to deal with the situation—after all, that
is the definition of a crisis (an unexpected yet serious event).
✓ Sports—Some talented athletes have found that ADHD does not exact

Work 215
a big price for success. Think about Olympic swimmer Michael Phelps, late pro
golfer Payne Stewart, and Olympic gymnast Simone Biles. Becoming a profes-
sional athlete is not in the cards for most of us, but there are many other sports-
related occupations, from phys ed teacher and school sports coach to jobs at out-
door sports parks and health clubs, personal trainer jobs and jobs teaching others
your sport, and even ranger jobs at national and state parks.
✓ Computer technician/consultant—Here your computer knowledge and
skills can coexist with your ADHD traits with less impairment than in other
fields. Those working on the IT “help desk” rove throughout a business, resolving
computer issues for other employees.
✓ Food service industry—I know many adults with ADHD who have gone
into culinary arts and become chefs at restaurants, resorts, cafeterias, and other
places of employment and found the work to be creative and relatively unaffected
by their ADHD-related deficits. Cooking requires a focus on the moment, the
immediate steps to create the finished product, and a flair for creativity with
ingredients while not demanding long-range planning, lots of working memory,
or persistence at unrewarding activities for long periods of time. Unusual or flex-
ible hours, with the sporadic ebb-and-flow pacing of the work from slow to peak
meal-prep hours and then slow again, can add just the right touch of crisis and
excitement during the peak meal hours to keep you alert and focused on the work
at hand.
✓ Self-employment/entrepreneurship—Starting a small business or just
being a sole proprietor can prove ADHD-friendly, whether you open your own
bakery, run a landscaping, computer consulting, or personal fitness coaching busi-
ness, or work in one of the trades listed above. The hours can be more flex-
ible than when you work with others, you are your own boss, the consequences
for working (or not working) are immediate (no work, no food or rent money),
and the work settings can vary considerably from day to day, accommodating
the restlessness that many adults with ADHD experience. One notch up from
being self-employed in an established field, such as landscaping, home building,
housecleaning, or running a restaurant or car wash, is being an entrepreneur. The
term usually refers to people who create new products, services, or even entire
industries in innovative ways that carry a greater financial risk but also a greater
payoff than most other self-employment. Johan Wiklund, an endowed chair in the
entrepreneurial studies division of the School of Business at Syracuse University,
believes that entrepreneurs are more likely to have ADHD and are more likely
to succeed because of it, particularly if they are highly intelligent and have little
or no comorbid (additional) psychiatric disorders. Their disinhibited and hence
more creative thought process, willingness to take risks, hyperfocusing on work

believes that entrepreneurs are more likely to have ADHD and are more likely
to succeed because of it, particularly if they are highly intelligent and have little
or no comorbid (additional) psychiatric disorders. Their disinhibited and hence
more creative thought process, willingness to take risks, hyperfocusing on work

216 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
they love, and engaging social styles may all combine to make for entrepreneurial
success.
✓ Photographer/videographer—Many of the adults who assisted me in
creating my various DVDs on ADHD or with whom I have worked on various
media projects were themselves adults with the disorder. They were able to deal
quite well with the day-to-day changes in settings where they would be filming,
the diversity of stories or topics they were asked to cover, the short bursts of work
interspersed with breaks, and, of course, the frequent opportunities to interact
with a variety of people, all of which were a good fit for their short attention span,
propensity for boredom in tedious environments, and difficulties with sustained
effort across hours or days and projects or tasks.
✓ Performing arts—Actors, comedians, musicians, and others in the per-
forming arts often rely on emotional expression and can take advantage of frequent
changes in the setting and nature of the work, freedom of movement, limited need
for long-range planning and organization, and low requirement for self-motivation
given the immediate and intrinsic pleasure people may get from engaging in these
professions. Howie Mandel (America’s Got Talent) has ADHD yet has been quite
successful in comedy and show business; Ty Pennington (Extreme Makeover:
Home Edition) likewise has adult ADHD yet has served as the central character
in a show that has done much good for needy families. And so does Glenn Beck,
former Fox News commentator and now independent radio show host. Also con-
sider musician Adam Levine, lead singer/songwriter of Maroon 5 and former judge
on TV’s The Voice.
These are just some examples of occupations that may prove to be especially
friendly to those having ADHD. If you use the descriptions as a springboard for
your imagination, you can undoubtedly come up with other career paths that
would be suitable for you given your own set of unique aptitudes and flair for the
nontraditional avenues of work. But you also need to consider the working envi-
ronment.
The Working Environment
✓ Do noise and other distractions keep you from focusing no matter what
the work is? If so, an open room full of desks could be a disaster for you. Even bays
that have clusters with a smaller number of desks might be a problem because it
will be tough to block out your coworkers. Cubicles with opaque walls that keep
you from noticing the movement of passersby are better. A private office might be
best of all if you can get it. The ideal would be a workspace away from the main
traffic pattern but close to your supervisor or other person to whom you’ll be

will be tough to block out your coworkers. Cubicles with opaque walls that keep
you from noticing the movement of passersby are better. A private office might be
best of all if you can get it. The ideal would be a workspace away from the main
traffic pattern but close to your supervisor or other person to whom you’ll be

Work 217
accountable. If you have an office, keep the door closed. If necessary because of
office noise, use Bluetooth noise-canceling headphones and listen to your favorite
instrumental music while working. If someone happens by, meet the person at the
door and lean against the jamb so he or she doesn’t waltz in and take a seat just
to visit. Don’t offer coffee or food, but be gracious and ask immediately how you
can help the person. Coworkers can be huge sources of distraction or “off-task”
activities, so limit such interference when you can.
✓ Will you be working at a computer with e-mail? If so, and your job doesn’t
depend on rapid response to e-mails, resolve to check it briefly at the beginning
of the day for urgent messages from supervisors or coworkers, then shut off the
e-mail program and don’t check it again until lunch and then again at the end of
the day. This gives you more time in the middle of the morning and afternoon to
focus on the projects you need to tackle and eliminates one of the greatest sources
of distraction and low productivity in the workplace.
✓ Is the Internet available? Keep your Internet browser closed as well so
that pop-up ads, chimes, or other attention-getting stimuli cannot disrupt your
concentration on the projects that need your attention. And definitely avoid text
messaging or tweeting friends or others during the workday by shutting down
your cell phone for periods when your concentration on tasks or projects is impor-
tant. As with e-mail, you can check your phone messages two to three times per
day (beginning, middle, end) and keep up with anything that may be urgent and
important. But most e-mails and, especially, text messages are not relevant to your
immediate work and often are just attempts to socialize by others who cannot
focus on their work either.
✓ Will your assigned space help you get organized? If there’s no room for you
to put your files and other materials, you could spend the majority of your workday
looking for what you need.
✓ Will you be able to keep track of the passing hours? If you have no win-
dows, no wall clocks, and no other way to tell what time it is, you’ll have to rely
solely on your own tools to keep track of the time and stay on schedule. That
can be hard for adults with ADHD, who cannot seem to harness their internal
clocks to keep them functioning in a timely manner. If you are on a computer,
most have clock apps that you can open and show the passage of time to help you
with this. E-mail services and calendar or other organizing apps can help you with
alerts that you program into them when you initially set up certain goals, meet-
ings, trips, or other projects in them. The alarm function in your smartphone can
achieve the same result by pinging you every so often as a reminder to stay focused
on the task at hand.

with this. E-mail services and calendar or other organizing apps can help you with
alerts that you program into them when you initially set up certain goals, meet-
ings, trips, or other projects in them. The alarm function in your smartphone can
achieve the same result by pinging you every so often as a reminder to stay focused
on the task at hand.

218 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
Work Procedures
✓ How much flexibility is there? Sometimes a job interview instantly reveals
that the company expects the job to be done in a very specific way and has no
resources available for bending the way things have been done in the past. Always
ask questions about how the hirer will expect the goals to be met:
• 
“How long would you expect X to take to get done?”
• 
“How much advance notice will I have of an upcoming project?”
• 
“How often would I check in with you on my progress?”
• 
“In what form would you expect to receive reports?”
• 
“Will I be working on my own or with a team?”
Beware the interviewer who says it’s a “very loose” kind of operation and that
everyone can get the job done in the best way for the employee with little or no
supervision. Ask questions like the preceding and you may quickly find out that
there are actually much stricter requirements than the person has let on. Or, if you
don’t ask for specifics, you might find out on the job that “loose” is an understate-
ment and that you’re expected to be completely self-sufficient. This may make it
tough to introduce the idea of making yourself accountable to someone for step-
by-step progress on tasks.
✓ Are there established “rules” or guidelines for certain procedures? Most
adults with ADHD benefit from having a set of rules to follow so that they don’t
have to try to figure out what’s acceptable and what’s not. If this firm hasn’t estab-
lished such rules, will a supervisor or mentor be available to clarify priorities when
you’re new at the job?
✓ Will you be expected to be a self-starter? You might find that overwhelm-
ing and would want to steer clear of jobs like this. Or you might find it’s easy to
be a self-starter but harder to be a self-motivator once a task is under way. Which
leads to the next question:
✓ Does the job offer built-in frequent incentives and rewards? The more, the
better. Virtue may be its own reward for other people, but ADHD says, “Show me
the money” . . . and on a regular basis. If there are no opportunities for motivating
you other than those you provide yourself, find another job—or resolve to collect
every type of external cue and reward at your disposal.
✓ Do you have to punch a time clock, literally or figuratively? My research
has shown that adults with ADHD tend to be less punctual for work and appear to

Work 219
manage their time less efficiently. If strict work hours and punctuality are essential
or time is of the essence in this business, it may prove to be your doom. Or, all else
being favorable, you could choose to turn this to your advantage and make it all
part of your commitment to keeping track of time.
The People
✓ Who will be your supervisor?
• 
Someone you’ll work with every day, face-to-face?
• 
Someone you’ll be expected to report to throughout the day remotely
(by e-mail or phone)?
• 
Someone you’ll rarely see at all who will occasionally just send you a
list of objectives?
You’re likely to need a fair amount of hands-on oversight and interaction. If

Someone you’ll work with every day, face-to-face?
• 
Someone you’ll be expected to report to throughout the day remotely
(by e-mail or phone)?
• 
Someone you’ll rarely see at all who will occasionally just send you a
list of objectives?
You’re likely to need a fair amount of hands-on oversight and interaction. If
your supervisor won’t be able to give you much guidance or keep you accountable,
is someone else available to do that and serve as a mentor?
✓ Will your supervisor be supportive of what you need to get the job done?
Whether the job can be adapted to suit your needs often depends largely on your
supervisor. If your boss takes a sink-or-swim attitude with employees and doesn’t
give a hoot about individual needs, you should probably find another job.
✓ Will your coworkers be supportive too? Or will you be swimming with
sharks? If this business’s approach to reaching goals or achieving excellence is
to pit employees against each other in cutthroat competition, can you handle it?
Some adults with ADHD have developed a heightened sensitivity to the responses
they get from others. Given good reason to believe your coworkers are out to get
you, will you be inspired to beat them, or will you find it impossible to get your
work done?
Should I reveal that I have ADHD when I’m interviewing for a job?
If you’re going to assert your right to receive workplace accommodations under the
Americans with Disabilities Act, yes. You may have to invoke that law to get what
you need. If you are going to work in a field that requires periodic training, testing,
or certification, you may need special accommodations for test taking, available
through the act. In that case you’ll have to provide paperwork to document your
diagnosis. But you may be able to get what you need just by finding the right type
?

220 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
of workplace. This is why it’s so important to ask the questions listed above. If
you can tell that the company and your supervisor will be flexible and supportive
without your having to name your disorder, you may be able to keep that informa-
tion private. Many adults prefer not to disclose their ADHD. And you might not
have to if you do everything in your power to minimize your symptoms. This is
another reason to avail yourself of medication. If it normalizes or greatly reduces
your symptoms, ADHD won’t need to come up at all.
Laying the Groundwork for Success on the Job
Many of the tools and preparation steps for doing well at
work parallel those for doing well at school. Here’s a quick
rundown of what you can do to give yourself the best pos-
sible foundation for occupational achievement:
✓ Consult one of the books listed in the Resources
at the back of this book to familiarize yourself with the
provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act and the
accommodations typically available in the workplace. You
may want to avail yourself of these accommodations at
some point even if not right now.
✓ Practice, practice, practice the strategies under the eight everyday rules for
success given in Step Four. When you’re considering taking a particular job, think
about how these rules might benefit you in that workplace. As recommended
there, make a list and post these in your office or near your computer screen so
you can refer to them frequently throughout the day.
✓ Consider medication if you aren’t already taking it. This may be especially

success given in Step Four. When you’re considering taking a particular job, think
about how these rules might benefit you in that workplace. As recommended
there, make a list and post these in your office or near your computer screen so
you can refer to them frequently throughout the day.
✓ Consider medication if you aren’t already taking it. This may be especially
helpful if you’re making the transition from the less demanding jobs of adoles-
cence to the adult jobs that require a lot more time, effort, achievement, respon-
sibility, and skills. As with school, the long-acting forms (sometimes with a single
dose of the immediate-release medicine added later in the day) will keep you going
through most of the workday.
✓ Find a coach or mentor at work. This can be a coworker, friend, or sup-
portive supervisor—anyone you can make yourself accountable to every day for
the work that you believe needs to get done. As with school, it helps to meet twice
a day for 5 minutes at a time—which is why it’s useful to have your supervisor or
If you haven’t read
Chapter 24, you might
want to skim it even if
you’re not in school for
full details about some
of the tools and tips
listed there.


Work 221
other coach in close proximity. Set goals during your first meeting and then review
what you’ve accomplished during the second meeting.
✓ Identify the disability specialist in the human resources department at
your company. This is the person you will provide with documentation of your
ADHD and the person who will explain the available workplace accommoda-
tions. This person may also work with your supervisor to make sure you get the
accommodations you choose. If you need therapy or medication, the disability
specialist will be able to refer you to psychologists, counselors, and physicians (usu-
ally psychiatrists) who have contracts with the employer for providing employee
mental health services.
✓ Gather whatever tools will help you keep track of tasks, goals, deadlines,
promises, appointments, and any other time-related information you need to
remember:
• 
Day planners
• 
Smartphones
• 
Your journal
• 
The calendar in your e-mail system
• 
A tactile cueing device such as the MotivAider
(see amazon.com), or the timers on your smart-
phone, which can be set to vibrate at certain
intervals or at random to remind you to stay
on task
✓ Get a recorder such as the Smartpen digital
recorder (see livescribe.com) to record important meetings
(with the permission of your supervisor).
See Chapter 19 for
more on using a journal.
I can’t stress enough
how critical your
journal is to success in
all domains of your life.

Recruiting a coach/mentor is critical and can benefit you far beyond
the accountability it will provide. If you gain this person’s respect, others
will hear about it, and you may find yourself with allies you didn’t actively cul-
tivate. So make it a priority to do what you’ve agreed to do with your coach
or mentor. Show your appreciation through small tokens of thanks. Resist
any urge to seek this person’s advice or help with personal problems; stick
to company business. (You can always see a life coach if you need help with
personal issues.)

tivate. So make it a priority to do what you’ve agreed to do with your coach
or mentor. Show your appreciation through small tokens of thanks. Resist
any urge to seek this person’s advice or help with personal problems; stick
to company business. (You can always see a life coach if you need help with
personal issues.)

222 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
Reclaiming the Edge That ADHD Tries to Take Away
There’s no denying that it’s a competitive world. If you don’t do well at your job,
you won’t get a raise or promotion. You might not even get to keep the job. And
there’s always someone waiting in line to claim it. It’s also human nature to want
to achieve and excel and be respected by our peers. So, do everything you can to
be at the top of your game at work despite ADHD.
✓ Find out if there is a library or information center that contains resources
for further learning on the job. If so, you’ll want to make a habit of using it to give
yourself the informational edge that ADHD dulls. Also attend any extra informa-
tion sessions offered after hours. And if a seminar or workshop is offered on a
volunteer basis, volunteer to go. It may sound boring, but a change of scene may
be even more beneficial to you than to most adults.
✓ Take notes throughout meetings that threaten to bore
you to tears. Note taking may remind you of some of your least
favorite moments in school, but laptops and tablets make it
easy to record what’s going on, especially if they have a hand-
writing recognition tablet or screen, and the sheer physical
motion of taking notes will keep you focused—to say nothing
of providing a great resource that you can refer to later if you’re
having trouble re-creating what everyone said.
✓ Use the SQ4R method when you have lots of reading to do before a meet-
ing or other event.
✓ Walk around the block or the halls or come up with an
excuse to go down to the convenience store or coffee bar in the
lobby or around the corner before a long meeting or other quiet
period where you’ll have to stay seated and be attentive. A brisk
walk of just a few minutes will improve your concentration for
about an hour afterward.
See pages
205–206 of
Chapter 24 for tips
on staying on your
game by being fit.

See
page 206 of
Chapter 24 for
more on SQ4R.

Cultivating Allies at Work
Step Two explained why good relationships with others often elude adults
with ADHD. Limited self-regulation can make social interactions challeng-
ing. The mere fact that you’ve been exposed to a lot of criticism, possibly
for most of your life, can make you touchy and overcautious in approach-
ing people for help or friendship. For this reason you might not be facile

Work 223
at recruiting allies and friendly colleagues. You might butt heads with your
boss. Yet it’s widely known today that success at work (and everywhere
else) can be as much a function of social skills and savoir faire as it is of prac-
tical skills, knowledge, intelligence, and drive. Here are some specific ideas
for cultivating the cooperation, compassion, and goodwill of your coworkers.
These ideas will not only make your workday more pleasant but will get you
an edge in meeting the demands of your job.
• Try some cooperative coworker tutoring when you need to learn
something substantial on the job: new software, new regulatory codes, new
legislation, new technology—whatever you need to master to keep per-
forming well in the job. Maybe each of you reads a chapter of a new manual

an edge in meeting the demands of your job.
• Try some cooperative coworker tutoring when you need to learn
something substantial on the job: new software, new regulatory codes, new
legislation, new technology—whatever you need to master to keep per-
forming well in the job. Maybe each of you reads a chapter of a new manual
and then explains it to the other.
• If your department doesn’t already operate using teams, set one up
on your own. Be on the lookout for the coworkers who have the skills and
interests you lack. Figure out what you can offer that is not a strength of
theirs. Identify a departmental goal that you can achieve faster and better
working together than you could singly.
• Find a coworker who will have your back—and do the same for that
person. If either of you forgets materials, information, or anything else you
need while away from the office, the other will be there to supply it. This can
be a boon if you don’t have secretaries or assistants and you need informa-
tion not available via computer when you’re traveling for business.
• Be fair and reasonable when you request support and accommoda-
tions from your supervisor, the disability specialist, and even coworkers who
have shown a willingness to help you out. One person I know said she found
it just as helpful that her human resources contact would tell her straight out
what the company could not do to accommodate her needs as what it could
do. The parameters had been drawn clearly, and the employee kept these
limitations in mind whenever she felt tempted to ask for more help than she
was getting. Mutual respect resulted.
• Schedule supervisor review meetings more often than at annual or
semiannual performance/salary review meetings. Every 3 to 6 weeks is a
good interval to aim for. The person you meet with may not be your direct
supervisor but someone further up the ladder who can give you another
perspective on how you’re doing. Who this person would be depends on
the structure of your company. Requests you make for this feedback may
not be met by the person you ask first, but any higher-up will respect your
desire to monitor and better your performance.

224
26
Money
“Things like balancing my checkbook, paying traffic tickets, getting regular dental
checkups, and other routine things seem to elude me. But, hey, I finally pay the
rent and utility bills on time, so that’s a victory. I haven’t had my utilities shut
down for nonpayment for quite a while.”
When you have ADHD, there’s a money pit everywhere you turn. Any opportu-
nity to spend can turn into an impulse purchase. Money problems among adults
with ADHD run the gamut from overspending to nonpayment of bills to failure
to plan for retirement.
Our research has found that adults with ADHD:
• 
Made a lot of impulse purchases
• 
Had high credit card balances
• 
Exceeded their credit limits more than others
• 
Made bill, loan, and rent payments late or not at all
• 
Had their cars repossessed more often than others
• 
Had lower credit ratings
• 
Were more likely to have no savings
• 
Were less likely to save for retirement
• 
Bounced checks more often than others
• 
Often failed to save receipts that could document money-saving tax
deductions and other documents for their income tax returns
• 
Lost friends after borrowing money and not repaying it

Were more likely to have no savings
• 
Were less likely to save for retirement
• 
Bounced checks more often than others
• 
Often failed to save receipts that could document money-saving tax
deductions and other documents for their income tax returns
• 
Lost friends after borrowing money and not repaying it

Money 225
If you are like most adults with ADHD, you’ve experienced a lot of these
problems. You probably understand why the woman quoted above thought not
having her utilities turned off was a major achievement. Money trouble can per-
meate—even rule—your life, and it’s a lot harder to get out of than it is to get
into. And there are so many different ways money can be a trap for you—any one
financial problem has a way of spawning a number of others. Exceed your credit
limit or pile up too much student debt and pay your bills late often enough and
your credit rating plummets. You could easily be denied a mortgage or a car loan
when you need one. Continuing to pay rent or having to live with a clunker that
needs constant costly repairs can absorb your paycheck, leaving you nothing to
save. Then what do you do when you suddenly have a car accident and need to
pay the deductibles on both your health insurance and car insurance and have
no cash?
Money problems are also notorious for causing relationship conflict. Trying
to extricate yourself from debt may lead to borrowing money and alienating those
who now feel the burden of your financial trouble. Disputes with intimate partners
often center on money matters, and they may get even more heated when one
person has trouble managing money due to ADHD.
Why Money Matters Are So Challenging for You . . .
and What You Can Do about It
If, like many adults with ADHD, you’ve ended up in financial trouble, it’s not
necessarily that you don’t wish to be solvent or that you don’t understand how to
get there. But ADHD has a way of letting your best intentions and your knowl-
edge fall by the wayside. Fortunately, you can take charge of your ADHD and your
finances. The deficits caused by ADHD can steer you wrong, but you can steer
yourself back in the right direction:
Money and the Mind’s Eye
Impulsive shopping can become compulsive shopping when
your nonverbal working memory is weak. You can’t picture
what happened last time you bought an expensive item you
didn’t need. You can’t bring the future into sharp enough
relief to put off the purchase till you’ve saved the cash. You
haven’t developed the self-awareness to realize that for you
walking into an antique store is like opening the gates of hell.
The mind’s eye is particularly important in controlling the
impulse to buy things you don’t need or can’t afford.
See more on
how the mind’s eye
works in Chapter 9
and how to make
the most of it in
Chapter 17.


226 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
Using strategies from Step Four, you could externalize the desire to resist
spending money by keeping a photo of a long-term goal (a vacation spot, a home,
a bike for one of your kids, and so forth) in your pocket to pull out whenever you
feel the urge to buy. You might train yourself to say out loud before you pull out
your wallet, “Hmmmm, do I really need this?” Or put a sticky note on your credit
card that simply says, “NO!” Then you could turn on your imaginary wide-screen
TV and watch a film of yourself opening your credit card bill the last time you
overspent.
Your Finances and the Mind’s Voice

feel the urge to buy. You might train yourself to say out loud before you pull out
your wallet, “Hmmmm, do I really need this?” Or put a sticky note on your credit
card that simply says, “NO!” Then you could turn on your imaginary wide-screen
TV and watch a film of yourself opening your credit card bill the last time you
overspent.
Your Finances and the Mind’s Voice
Remember, the mind’s voice is your backup when the mind’s eye is myopic. If you
find yourself feeling the urge to pull out your credit card and you really can’t call
up a visual picture of what happened the last time you overspent, interview your-
self. If you’re in a store, leave and do this on the sidewalk. As I mentioned in
Step Four, you won’t get hauled away for being delusional; people will just think
you’re on your cell phone when you talk to yourself about whether this purchase
or withdrawal is wise. Consider asking a friend to serve as a gatekeeper for your
purchases—someone you will text or call before making any purchase so that he
or she can ask whether you really need this item and hold you accountable for your
spending. Offer to reciprocate.
If you tend to put off bill paying even when
you’ve set an alarm to remind you to do it, this is
another time you can talk to yourself about why you
need to do it right now. The mind’s voice is also the
faculty that allows you to formulate and use rules.
Set certain rules about spending and saving and then
repeat those rules to yourself quietly when under
pressure from your ADHD to break them. Or write
them down on a card you keep banded together with
your credit card so you can’t access the credit card
without the rules card.
If forgetting is the main reason you don’t pay
bills on time, all of the reminder devices discussed
in Step Four, plus your journal, can provide you with
the necessary cues.
The Mind’s Heart in the World of Money
Are you an emotional spender? Are you the person who always buys a round of
drinks at the pub when you’re feeling great? The one who “needs” a new outfit
See Chapter 9 for more
on the mind’s voice.
See Chapter 18 for
more on training the mind’s
voice.
See Chapter 19 for
tools you can use to remind
yourself to save and not
spend.


Money 227
when you feel down? If you’re mad at your landlord, do you “show him” by “forget-
ting” to pay the rent? Does not having the cash to go out with friends make you
feel so bad that you decide to put the charges on your credit card? You’re going to
have to pull out your whole bag of mental imagery and self-talk tricks to recognize
when your emotions are carrying you away and how to get control. Also try to
stick to a healthy lifestyle. Sleep deprivation, overconsumption of caffeine or alco-
hol, drug use, lack of exercise, and poor diet can all make
you more vulnerable to daily stress and make it harder to
control your emotions.
Don’t forget that you can use your emotions for
good too. Hate bill paying? Feel the future: Do every-
thing you can to feel the relief of getting it done. Can’t
motivate yourself to put money in savings when your
paycheck is burning a hole in your pocket? Set up auto-
matic deposits through work so you don’t see the money
at all. Feel how great it will be to take it out when you
pay for your Caribbean vacation.
Financial Planning and Problem Solving
in the Mind’s Playground
Many adults, ADHD or no ADHD, just don’t know how to
do financial planning, budget, oversee their investments,

matic deposits through work so you don’t see the money
at all. Feel how great it will be to take it out when you
pay for your Caribbean vacation.
Financial Planning and Problem Solving
in the Mind’s Playground
Many adults, ADHD or no ADHD, just don’t know how to
do financial planning, budget, oversee their investments,
or keep track of income and expenditures. If this is true
for you, try making money matters physical, as emphasized
in Step Four.
Use tangible objects and graphic tools to manipulate
the numbers whenever possible. The following pages will
give you some ideas. But remember the basics too: Make
lists of steps to complete financial tasks you find daunting.
Record your spending habits in your journal so you can
take a look back at the patterns that are hurting you and
any that are serving you well.
Getting Control of Your Money
Fortunately, you’ve got a lot of resources at your fingertips for taking back control
of your financial present and future. There are many strategies for discouraging
spending. Tools and cues can help you meet your financial obligations on time.
You can set up systems that enforce saving so you don’t have to fight the urge to
See Chapter 9 for
more on the mind’s heart
and Chapter 20 for ways
to use your emotions to
motivate you to handle
your finances the way
you want to.

See Chapter 9 for
more on the mind’s
playground and
Chapter 22 to get ideas
for making money
management tangible.


228 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
spend everything you earn over and over. You can even access free credit counsel-
ing through certain banks or government programs in some regions.
A New Approach to Money Management
Here are a few ideas for getting started on a better path:
✓ Take advantage of community resources if you’re in trouble. It’s paramount
that you become more aware of community resources, such as assistance from
banks, credit unions, and others who may be able to help you address these money
management problems. Debt reorganization, credit counseling, budgeting advice,
and bankruptcy assistance are all available. If you are massively in debt and it
seems hopeless or you’re thinking of declaring bankruptcy, get free credit coun-
seling first from a bank or credit union. They can often help you reorganize your
finances, consolidate debt, and renegotiate unusually high interest rates and meet
with you monthly to keep you and your budget on track and keep you accountable
to someone besides yourself.
✓ Let your spouse, partner, or even parent manage your money. Doing this pre-
sumes this person does not also have ADHD and can be trusted to manage your
finances with your best interests in mind. It might be something to consider if you
feel overwhelmed by the problems you’re having and find it impossible to control
your spending or other financial habits. You can always agree to do this for a pre-
set temporary time period or until a certain goal—such as paying off a debt or
accumulating a certain amount of savings—is reached. Turn over your paycheck
to this person, let the person allocate sufficient cash to you to meet daily expenses,
then work together to see that monthly bills, loans, and credit cards are paid regu-
larly. If appropriate, have your manager set up an automatic bill-paying system
with your bank so that some important bills like rent, mortgage, and car loan pay-
ments are automatically deducted from your checking account each month. And

then work together to see that monthly bills, loans, and credit cards are paid regu-
larly. If appropriate, have your manager set up an automatic bill-paying system
with your bank so that some important bills like rent, mortgage, and car loan pay-
ments are automatically deducted from your checking account each month. And
don’t forget to reward your helper periodically, such as with lunch out, a takeout
meal, or an Internet coffee shop or restaurant gift card, or just bake some cookies
or brownies occasionally.
✓ Budget! Make a monthly budget sheet that
shows all your monthly expenses, including one-
twelfth of your annual expenses (those that you may
pay just once per year, such as taxes, car insurance,
and homeowner’s insurance). You need to have a
monthly financial plan with all your bills listed in
front of you so you can see what you owe. This budget
needs to be less than what you make per month. Keep
You can get software programs
to help with setting up a budget,
but I favor good old-fashioned
pencil and paper—just as easy
and cheaper.

Money 229
it out on your desk at home where you do paperwork or on your dresser so you can
refer to it often. Spending as you go each month is a recipe for disaster, not to men-
tion having your utilities turned off and your car repossessed.
✓ Start living within your means today. Do not spend
more each month than you earn and then try to use credit
cards, loans, or other means of borrowing to see you through
the month. You need to get your living expenses below 90%
of your monthly earnings while saving that remaining 10%.
Enlist the help of a competent, trusted relative, an accoun-
tant, or a bank employee in figuring out your expenses and
what method is best for saving.
✓ Set up a system of accounts and deposits for enforced savings. Have your
employer put 10% of your pretax earnings into a retirement plan (tax deferred)
such as a 401(k), 403(b), Keogh, or IRA. Often they will match your contribution
up to a certain amount. That is free money you are leaving on the table if you
don’t take advantage of these plans at work when they
are available. Then have your after-tax paycheck direct
deposited into your checking account. Once it is there,
have your bank move 10% of it into a savings account
automatically each month. The less you see of your cash,
the less you can spend it impulsively. You also need an
emergency savings account to cover unexpected
expenses such as car repairs and medical expenses not
covered by insurance. If that does not leave you enough
for your usual monthly expenses, cut down on those expenses instead. You can
find enough fat in your budget to cut your expenses by 10% so you can start sav-
ing. Many people find, for example, that brewing their own coffee and taking
homemade lunches to work instead of patronizing coffee shops and restaurants
builds daily savings that really add up.
✓ Try to get health and disability insurance through your employer. Always assess
such benefits when looking for a job, and keep in mind that government employers
at all levels nearly always provide these benefits.
✓ Balance your bank statement monthly without fail. Don’t just wing it or guess.
Having little idea of how much money you have in your account(s) at any one time
is one of the biggest causes of credit card overuse, overdrafts, and debt accumula-
tion. Keep in mind that many of the new online banks offer no-fee accounts in

✓ Balance your bank statement monthly without fail. Don’t just wing it or guess.
Having little idea of how much money you have in your account(s) at any one time
is one of the biggest causes of credit card overuse, overdrafts, and debt accumula-
tion. Keep in mind that many of the new online banks offer no-fee accounts in
response to widespread objections to high overdraft and other banking fees, and
these banks may offer mobile apps that help you stay on top of your bank balances
to the minute.
Unexpected medical costs
are one of the biggest
sources of unanticipated
expenses, large debts,
and even bankruptcy.
If you don’t save at least 10%
of your income, you are having
your vacation/retirement
now
and will be working the rest of
your life to pay for it!

230 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
✓ Keep all receipts as you get them. Put them in your wallet. Make a nightly
habit of taking out your wallet and going through it to remove all receipts and put
them in a file. You can use this file to help keep track of what you are spending
and to store the receipts, which will be very useful for preparing your taxes and
getting the most out of your available deductions.
Curbing Your Spending
Besides the ideas for controlling impulse buying described earlier, try these:
✓ Operate on a cash basis. Withdraw cash from your checking account only
when you absolutely need it. Carry as little with you as possible so you’re not
tempted to spend it impulsively on stuff you don’t need.
✓ Do NOT carry a credit or ATM card if at all possible.
Get rid of all store credit cards, keep one general card like
MasterCard or Visa, and put a sticker on it that reads “For
Emergency Use Only.” Transfer all unpaid balances on store
cards to this single card and work to pay off the balance as
soon as you possibly can.
✓ Do NOT go to a shopping area if there is nothing you
need to buy. And I mean NEED, not want, to buy. And never
meet friends to socialize while browsing. The temptation to buy stuff while wan-
dering through stores can be too great when impulse control is limited by ADHD.
✓ Don’t lend anyone other than your children any money. Period. And even
your children are not a good bet to repay you, so keep those loans limited to edu-
cational expenses or necessities, not things like clothing or entertainment. Odds
are you will not see that money again. If you give money to someone else, you’d
better view it as the gift it most likely will be, not as a loan.
✓ Stay away from casinos. They always win. Don’t play cards for money, and
certainly not more than pennies a hand. Avoid places where impulsive gambling
can get the best of you, including Internet gaming websites.
✓ Take advantage of cognitive-behavioral treatments for impulse buying if no
other measures help. If you find it hard to stop shopping and spending on things
you don’t need, get professional help from a psychologist or financial counselor.
Getting Control of Credit
Besides paying off credit cards and not carrying them, try these ideas:
The minimum credit
card payment is based
on a 10-year payoff
plan, assuming no
extra debt is added to
the card—
10 years!

you don’t need, get professional help from a psychologist or financial counselor.
Getting Control of Credit
Besides paying off credit cards and not carrying them, try these ideas:
The minimum credit
card payment is based
on a 10-year payoff
plan, assuming no
extra debt is added to
the card—
10 years!

Money 231
✓ Never borrow money for something you consume, wear,
or use for entertainment (like flat-screen TVs, iPhones). Bor-
row just for buying a home, getting a car (maybe), or some
other reasonable investment.
✓ Do NOT sign any contracts for credit, loans, or similar
commitments without having a money manager—your relative
or a professional—review it first to see if you really need to be
doing this.
✓ Never, ever, ever take out a “payday loan.” The storefront businesses that
offer these loans charge interest rates that are so high you will never be able to get
out of debt. This is legalized loan sharking. Stay away from it. Period.
The only time you
should buy something
whose value goes down
the minute you buy it is
when it’s a necessity.

232
27
Relationships
“So my wife tells this psychologist we went to see for marital problems that being
married to me is like having another child around the house and she already has
three of them and doesn’t need a fourth, so that if he cannot help us with our mar-
riage and straighten me out she is gonna leave me! She tells him I can’t seem to
follow through on anything, that I have projects half finished lying around all over
the house, and that I cannot have anything ready when it’s supposed to be done.
She has taken over the paying of all the bills ’cause when I had that job, we had
our phone and electric service shut down twice because I forgot to pay the monthly
bills or didn’t pay them on time.”
“I seem to burn through relationships with others a lot faster than the other women I
know. My boyfriends sometimes called me a ‘space cadet’ because when they were
talking to me about things, especially things that meant a lot to them, I was just
staring at them, or daydreaming and clearly not listening, or I would just interrupt
them to talk about something that just came into my mind. Once I was dating this
really nice guy and we were getting really serious about each other and then, on a
whim, I met this guy in a bar one night when my girlfriends and I were out partying
and I just went back to his apartment and slept with him on an impulse. And my
boyfriend heard about it from one of the girls with me that night and that was the
end of that relationship. I don’t know why I do things like that on an impulse. And
I can’t seem to concentrate on what others are saying to me for very long or stay
committed to a good relationship. I mean, I can be my own worst enemy in my life.”
You probably don’t need a psychologist to tell you how ADHD and its underlying
problem with self-control create social difficulties. The way ADHD stacks the deck
against you can hurt more in your personal, social life than anywhere else. If you
had the condition as a child, you may still carry the scars of being treated as dif-
ferent or undesirable to be around. Today, you might look enviously at others who
seem to make friends without trying . . . who have longtime spouses or partners
. . . who can call on parents and siblings and colleagues for company and comfort.

had the condition as a child, you may still carry the scars of being treated as dif-
ferent or undesirable to be around. Today, you might look enviously at others who
seem to make friends without trying . . . who have longtime spouses or partners
. . . who can call on parents and siblings and colleagues for company and comfort.

Relationships 233
You might be highly aware of the ways ADHD is harming your relationships,
but you might not know how. There are three aspects of self-control that can have
huge effects on your relationships:
When Emotions Take Control Away from You
The executive function called emotion regulation causes lots of
trouble for adults with ADHD. Unfortunately, because it
doesn’t seem connected to more widely known symptoms like
inattention and hyperactivity, you might not automatically
associate emotional upheaval with the disorder. But adults with
ADHD report that problems with managing anger, frustration,
and hostility when provoked are just as common as their other
symptoms and lead to lots of social conflict.
Part of what society considers “adult”
consists of controlling your temper, dealing
quietly with frustration, shrugging off minor
slights, managing your impatience while wait-
ing, and shielding others from your moods.
So it’s hardly surprising that many people
will not tolerate emotional outbursts and will
often end relationships because of them.
When ADHD Robs You of Self-Awareness
ADHD diminishes your ability to monitor
your ongoing behavior. With hindsight—
especially if you’ve been practicing using
your mind’s eye—you might be able to see
that your emotions can be overwhelming or
at least uncomfortable for those in the firing
line. You might recognize, ruefully, that some
people have opted out of your life because
they couldn’t stand the heat. But those revela-
tions don’t automatically translate into different
behavior at the moment when you’re provoked.
Sharpening your hindsight helps, but because
emotions are so powerful, awareness might
See Chapter 9
for more on the
emotional control
problems in ADHD.

Emotional control problems may
make you act boisterous, silly, or
melodramatic, but it’s uncontrolled anger
that threatens your relationships most.
See Rule 2 (Chapter 17) for
a couple of strategies you can
practice to sharpen your mind’s
eye so you become more self-
aware in the moment.
See
Taking Charge of Anger
(2nd ed.) by W. Robert Nay
(Guilford Press, 2012) and
Is It You,
Me, or Adult A.D.D.?
by Gina Pera
(1201 Alarm Press, 2008) for other
methods of anger management.


234 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
not be enough to stop the onslaught. Other methods for calming the arousal sys-
tem in the body can help too.
When ADHD Blurs Life’s Scripts
Social encounters with others require more than just the
normal give-and-take of conversations or other social
actions. Adults have to do a higher level of self-monitoring
to know when to start, shift, end, or keep an interaction
going. Continuously playing the role of spectator over our
own behavior as it plays out with others requires us to per-
form these steps in every encounter:
1. 
Read bodily and facial cues
2. 
Perceive the emotional nuances in tone of voice
3. 
Adjust our own behavior accordingly
You already know that deficits in executive functions make these steps partic-
ularly challenging for you. The ramifications? Every encounter with another per-
son is filled with traps. These traps can exacerbate the problems you already face

Perceive the emotional nuances in tone of voice
3. 
Adjust our own behavior accordingly
You already know that deficits in executive functions make these steps partic-
ularly challenging for you. The ramifications? Every encounter with another per-
son is filled with traps. These traps can exacerbate the problems you already face
at work and school with coworkers, classmates, and other casual acquaintances.
Reading entrance and exit
cues is just as important
as what you do onstage.
Our adult patients have often told us that they simply did not realize just how
poorly they were coming across to others during social encounters. At least
not until it was too late. Some of the social violations they reported committing:
• 
Dominating conversations with endless monologues or storytelling that
went nowhere
• 
Failing to listen closely for any length of time
• 
Having trouble reciprocating or taking turns during conversations or
social encounters
• 
Making tactless comments
• 
Failing to honor social etiquette appropriate to the situation

Relationships 235
They become huge pitfalls in the relationships you want to last, including friend-
ships and particularly closer relationships like intimate partnerships. Let’s look at
different types of relationships more closely.
Intimate Relationships: Spouses and Partners
The two individuals quoted at the beginning of this chapter poignantly related
how ADHD can affect an adult’s closest relationships. When one member of a
couple has ADHD, the balance of work in the household can end up askew, hurt
feelings can result from apparent insensitivity or lack of interest in the other per-
son, and intimacy can be threatened by poorly regulated emotion.
Interestingly, we don’t have any evidence that those who grow up with
ADHD marry, separate, or divorce more or less often than other adults. That
could be, however, because our follow-up studies have gone only as far as ages
20–30—ages at which 55–67% of all adults are still single.
Keeping ADHD from Ruining Your Closest Relationship
Unfortunately, to date there have been no studies on any particular approach to
addressing the problems ADHD can impose on dating and marriage. So I can’t offer
scientifically based advice. But here are some commonsense ideas flowing from
what research we do have:
✓ Get a diagnosis so you can get treatment if you haven’t done so already. In
working directly with adults, my colleagues and I have seen that medication, by
improving symptoms, also improves the relationships between intimate partners.
✓ Read Gina Pera’s book Is It You, Me, or Adult A.D.D.? (1201 Alarm Press,
Our research and other studies have shown that adults with ADHD are more
likely to have:
• 
Fair to poor dating relationships (four to five times more likely!).
• 
Lower-quality marital relationships (our studies found more than a two-
fold difference).
• 
Extramarital affairs.

✓ Read Gina Pera’s book Is It You, Me, or Adult A.D.D.? (1201 Alarm Press,
Our research and other studies have shown that adults with ADHD are more
likely to have:
• 
Fair to poor dating relationships (four to five times more likely!).
• 
Lower-quality marital relationships (our studies found more than a two-
fold difference).
• 
Extramarital affairs.

236 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
2008). This is the best book available right now for partners in relationships
where one has adult ADHD. Although the book’s advice is largely untested
in research studies, it seems sound given what science has revealed about
ADHD in adults. The Resources section of this book also includes two volumes
on this topic by Melissa Orlov and a book by Ari Tuckman on sex and adult
ADHD.
✓ Consider enrolling in a mindfulness meditation class, not so much for any
religious training in Buddhism, but for the more secularized mindfulness practices
of Jon Kabat-Zinn and others. Multiple recent studies have shown that mindful-
ness practices can help you cope with the symptoms and executive deficits of adult
ADHD, especially those involving emotional control. (For more information see
The Mindfulness Prescription for Adult ADHD by Lidia Zylowska, described in the
Resources.) Mindfulness shows great promise as a supplemental approach to tar-
geting the deficits of adult ADHD alongside medication treatment and cognitive-
behavioral therapy, such as that outlined by Mary Solanto in Cognitive-Behavioral
Therapy for Adult ADHD, listed in the Resources.
✓ Apply the strategies you read about in Step Four. Many couples feel they
can be themselves with the person they love. That may be true. But that should
mean being your best self, someone who tries hard to:
• 
Think before acting or speaking
• 
Keep track of what has been hurtful or helpful to the other person in
the past
• 
Remember significant dates like birthdays and anniversaries, using
the same kinds of external cues you use to remind yourself of doctors’
appointments, work deadlines, and other obligations
• 
Listen
• 
Exercise tact, kindness, and courtesy
• 
Do a fair share of household chores
• 
Be a good parent if you have kids, which leads us to . . .
Parenting
Parenting is the most stressful role that many of us play in
life. ADHD ups the ante in these ways, among others:
Adults with ADHD report
much higher parental
stress than other parents.

Relationships 237
✓ Now it’s doubly important to take care of yourself: A young child needs
you to be there for him or her.
✓ Now you have someone else to think of first—a tall order when you have
trouble resisting impulses to do what you want right now.
✓ Emotional control is more critical than ever since young kids inevitably
try their parents’ patience and also haven’t developed the executive func-
tions to control themselves.
✓ Kids can’t express themselves clearly all the time, meaning it’s your job to
figure out what they need from you . . . what you should say and when to
stay silent . . . when to be firm and when to yield. All of this requires the
sophisticated give-and-take skills mentioned above.
Now add in the possibility that your child may also have ADHD.
Research suggests that 30–54% of the children of adults with ADHD will
have ADHD.
Obviously having ADHD will make it hard for your child to understand and
follow your rules, to remember to do chores and homework, to control emotions

sophisticated give-and-take skills mentioned above.
Now add in the possibility that your child may also have ADHD.
Research suggests that 30–54% of the children of adults with ADHD will
have ADHD.
Obviously having ADHD will make it hard for your child to understand and
follow your rules, to remember to do chores and homework, to control emotions
when frustrated or tired, and to behave well at home and in public.
Our own study found that the children of adults with ADHD were also more
likely to be oppositional and defiant even if they did not have ADHD.
If ADHD is genetic, does that mean I shouldn’t have children?
Of course not. ADHD is not a deadly disease or severe developmental disability
that could give your children an automatic death sentence or leave them in some
lifelong vegetative state. Those are the things that might cause parents to avoid
having children if it could be predicted that they would occur. Having ADHD is
not a life sentence of distress and failure either. Consider the odds for a moment.
?

238 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
If your own ADHD was not the result of genetics (it doesn’t run in your family
and your own case may have arisen from prenatal factors such as premature birth),
then your child’s chances of having ADHD are the same as anyone else’s—5 to
7.5%. That is no reason not to have children; if it were, no one would procreate.
Now even if your own adult ADHD is of the genetic type, it doesn’t guaran-
tee your child will have ADHD either. Yes, the chances will have gone up. Your
offspring have a 20–50% chance of having the disorder. But that also means you
have a 50–80% chance of having a child who does not have the disorder. When
it’s put that way, you can see that the chances are pretty decent you may not have
a child with ADHD.
Even if your children do have ADHD, it’s the most treatable disorder in psy-
chiatry, so it can be managed successfully, especially when identified and treated
early. And having ADHD doesn’t mean your child cannot have a long, produc-
tive, and happy life. When the disorder is managed properly, many children and
adults with ADHD wind up having fulfilling lives and contribute to our society in
useful and even important ways.
Good Parenting with ADHD
✓ Get your ADHD evaluated and treated. You can’t raise your children as
well as you would wish to do if your own ADHD is making it hard to con-
trol your behavior.
✓ If you see the signs of ADHD in your
child, or you have other concerns about
the child’s psychological development,
have him or her evaluated and treated
by a qualified mental health professional.
Having an undiagnosed and untreated
parent with ADHD raising an undiag-
nosed and untreated child with the dis-
order is a recipe for chronic conflict and
other psychological disasters.
✓ ADHD can make parents pay less attention to their kids and reward them
less. Try to set aside certain times to devote to your child. Use external
cues to remind you of these “appointments” and of the rewards you want
to give your child for the achievements and behavior all parents want to
encourage.
✓ If it is after school, a weekend, summer vacation, or any other time
when your children are home or in the yard and you’re responsible for
Guilt, fear, and a desire to avoid
more stress may make you downplay
signs of ADHD you see in your child.
In that case try to trust your spouse
or other close relative without ADHD

✓ If it is after school, a weekend, summer vacation, or any other time
when your children are home or in the yard and you’re responsible for
Guilt, fear, and a desire to avoid
more stress may make you downplay
signs of ADHD you see in your child.
In that case try to trust your spouse
or other close relative without ADHD
who reports the same concerns.

Relationships 239
supervising, set an external timer to frequent intervals, such as every 15
to 30 minutes, to remind you to stop what you’re doing and monitor your
children’s activities and whereabouts. This is even more important if your
children also have ADHD.
✓ Inconsistency is the bugaboo of parents with ADHD. You might be a
harsh taskmaster one day and your child’s fairy godmother the next. Or
you might just react impulsively to every (mis)behavior with
off-the-cuff comments, directives, commands, or reprimands.
This is confusing to kids. Talk through the family rules with
your child’s other parent, write them down, and keep them
posted where you’ll be reminded of them constantly while at
home. Buy yourself time whenever you find yourself con-
fronted by aggravating behavior from your child so you can
use the responses you’ve mutually decided on.
✓ Parents with ADHD also seem to be less adept at prob-
lem solving when confronted with a child’s behavior
problems. Use all the arrows in your quiver to learn
problem solving. It will model a crucial skill for your
child while helping you avoid conflict in the moment.
✓ Take a behavioral parent training class at a nearby
mental health clinic, medical school, university,
hospital, or county mental health center. Most large metropolitan areas
have such resources. If you live in a rural area lacking such services or
can’t find a parenting class, consider reading our book Your Defiant Child
(Guilford Press, 2013) to learn more about methods that can be very help-
ful in raising a child with ADHD. For teens, see our book Your Defiant
Teen (Guilford Press, 2013). Parents with ADHD do not do well in these
classes if their own ADHD is not being treated, so treat your own ADHD
See Chapter 16
for stop-the-action
strategies and
Chapter 19 for use
of external cues.

See Chapter 22
for strategies that
bump up problem
solving.

Several studies show that parents with ADHD are less likely to monitor their
children’s activities than other parents. Lack of monitoring is one of several fac-
tors that raise the risk of accidental injuries in those children. This may explain,
in part, why children with ADHD have more injuries of all types than other
kids—many of their parents have ADHD.

240 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
before starting one of these classes. If you live in Canada, you can get
online parent training classes, often live, at the Strongest Families website
(strongestfamilies.com).
✓ Put yourself in time-out (a quiet room) if you’re feeling overwhelmed or
stressed by your child.
✓ Build in weekly respites from your kids. Find some hobby, club, organiza-
tion, project, or recreational activity you love that renews you emotionally,
de-stresses you, or in other ways gives you time to recharge your parental
batteries. Every parent needs some time away every week to regroup, but
especially parents with ADHD.
Smart Dual Parenting
These are the types of duties it may be best to delegate to the parent with-
out ADHD:
• Handling school homework, especially if your ADHD is untreated.

de-stresses you, or in other ways gives you time to recharge your parental
batteries. Every parent needs some time away every week to regroup, but
especially parents with ADHD.
Smart Dual Parenting
These are the types of duties it may be best to delegate to the parent with-
out ADHD:
• Handling school homework, especially if your ADHD is untreated.
Most parents are not good tutors for their children, so you can bet
that this would be true for one with ADHD.
• Doing all the child care on alternating nights so that no parent carries
the burden of supervising and caring for the children throughout the
day or after school. Taking turns like this is especially important when
a child has ADHD.
• Handling time-sensitive events related to the children, such as medi-
cal and school appointments or deadlines for school projects. You
can make up for it by taking on tasks that are not time sensitive (like
laundry, housecleaning, home and car maintenance, yard care, bath-
ing the children, reading bedtime stories).
• Driving the kids to their activities whenever possible (unless you are
taking ADHD medication).
• Approving major child disciplinary actions you want to take before (!)
you implement them. It’s not that you should have no say, but discuss-
ing such moves with your partner can prevent poorly thought out and
possibly excessive discipline.

Relationships 241
Friendships
Do you have a lot of friends? Old friends? Our extensive studies on adults with
ADHD revealed significant problems with starting and maintaining social rela-
tionships. Adults with ADHD generally say they have fewer close friends than
others do, though most said they had some friends. Almost invariably, friend-
ships didn’t last as long as for adults without ADHD. Adults with ADHD say
they’re periodically on the outs with people they consider friends, usually because
they couldn’t figure out how to resolve normal conflicts or because they couldn’t
control their anger or other emotions. Sometimes this pattern ends in the adults
becoming pretty isolated, even reclusive.
Research has found that at least 50% and as many as 70% of children with
ADHD had no close friends by the time they reached second or third grade.
It didn’t take weeks or years for other kids to start rejecting those with ADHD
but minutes to hours after the child with ADHD entered a new peer group,
such as children at a summer camp.
Why is this childhood experience relevant to you? Because unless your
ADHD has been treated and you’ve invested effort into using strategies like those
in Step Four and developed the social skills usually blocked by ADHD, these dif-
ficulties with social relationships have probably followed you into adulthood, just
like ADHD has.
What to do about it? Follow all the advice for the other relationships in this
chapter. And don’t forget the all-important Rule 8 in Step Four: Demonstrate that
you can laugh at yourself and that you’re trying to overcome the social malaise
that ADHD has inflicted. Many friendships are made—and maintained—on a
foundation of honesty, humor (self-deprecation), and humility.

What to do about it? Follow all the advice for the other relationships in this
chapter. And don’t forget the all-important Rule 8 in Step Four: Demonstrate that
you can laugh at yourself and that you’re trying to overcome the social malaise
that ADHD has inflicted. Many friendships are made—and maintained—on a
foundation of honesty, humor (self-deprecation), and humility.

242
28
Driving, Health,
and Lifestyle Risks
“It’s not just all the speeding and parking tickets I seem to have racked up in my
life that explain why I have had my license suspended so many times, though God
knows they’re enough to explain some of those suspensions. It’s also my extreme
forgetfulness and this generally bad sense of timing I have. For instance, I neglected
to pay a ticket for a citation I got saying my car was ‘out of inspection.’ The police-
man told me that if I forgot to pay it my license would be suspended. So I get that
notice, forget to pay it, and now I get arrested for driving on a suspended license.
Then I get assigned to traffic school but forget to go on the right date. The problem
is that this has happened three times over a single episode of not getting my car
inspected. Then I got assigned to go back to traffic school. But I got the date wrong
for the starting day, so I miss that class. The judge then orders me to take the next
class and to do some community service too. Then I don’t follow up with doing the
community service the court required, and I am out driving anyway and wind up
being charged for driving on a suspended license again. The reason I got stopped
and they discovered my license was suspended was—duh!—my car inspection
decal was out of date! So this is my fourth time the court has suspended my license
for not paying the ticket for an uninspected car!”
“Do I speed with my car? You bet. If I didn’t, I couldn’t concentrate on the driving
part ‘cause I’d be fiddling with the radio and changing stations or text messaging
one of my friends or doing several things at once without paying much attention
to my driving. So, the speeding gets me excited and then I can focus better on the
driving itself.”
How do you figure out whether something is risky? You look at the conse-
quences—that is, what will happen in the future as a result.

driving, Health, and Lifestyle Risks 243
If you’ve read this book in order, I’m sure you’re way ahead
of me here: Without some self-restraint and a good sense of
time, how likely are you to be a wise judge of risk?
Not very.
Onlookers in your life may have accused you over the years
of indulging in risky behavior. By using the word indulge they’ve
been doing you an injustice. Indulge implies that you understand
the risk and take it anyway. That’s not the case.
Rather, you have deficits
in the executive functions that
would help you assess risk. To put it simply, where
risk is concerned, you usually don’t see that there
is any.
As a result of this limited foresight and con-
sequent poor risk assessment, plus all the other
symptoms of ADHD, you and other adults with
the condition have more:
✓ Driving problems
✓ Accidental injuries
✓ Health problems flowing from reduced concern for health-conscious
behavior, which can result in limited exercise, obesity, poor nutrition,
impaired sleep, and increased alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana use.
✓ Early pregnancies, early parenthood, and sexually transmitted diseases

✓ Accidental injuries
✓ Health problems flowing from reduced concern for health-conscious
behavior, which can result in limited exercise, obesity, poor nutrition,
impaired sleep, and increased alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana use.
✓ Early pregnancies, early parenthood, and sexually transmitted diseases
Research has documented all of these increased threats to your health, safety,
and welfare. Perhaps you’ve had your share of car accidents and tickets, broken
bones and burns, unplanned pregnancies, or regrettable one-night stands, and
you’d like to feel and look healthier. It’s no wonder that children with ADHD
are twice as likely as others to die before age 10 and adults with ADHD over four
times more likely to die by age 45, largely due to their risk taking and propensity
for accidental injuries. And my own recent research shows that all of these adverse
health correlates of having ADHD add up to an average of 11–13 years of reduced
life expectancy compared to others of the same age—that’s two to six times worse
than any of the big health risks public health agencies are so concerned about
in adults (smoking, obesity, alcohol use, poor nutrition, lack of exercise). Adult
ADHD isn’t just a mental health problem; left untreated it’s a public health prob-
lem too. So, isn’t it time to work on avoiding bad risks and stop listening to others
ranting about your “indulgences”?
ADHD makes you “probability blind”—
you don’t look ahead to consider
seriously and rationally what might
happen as a result of whatever
actions you’re considering taking.
If you
haven’t read this
book in order,
now is a good
time to take a
look at Step Two.


244 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
Driving Safely
I’m starting the discussion of risk with driving because problems that occur when
an adult with ADHD is behind the wheel are so common—and so potentially
deadly.
My research, studies done by others, and even DMV records all show that
adults with ADHD are more likely than other adults to have:
✓ Had their driver’s license suspended or revoked
✓ Been cited for driving without a valid driver’s license
✓ Crashed while driving
✓ Been at fault in such a crash
✓ Had crashes that were two to four times worse in terms of damage and
injuries
✓ Been cited for speeding and even reckless driving
Obviously, these are costly consequences. But you may not find them con-
vincing enough to address your own driving problems. That’s because, as others
have said, “statistics are people with their tears wiped away.” So let me tell you
a personal story that shows just how costly the driving problems of adults with
ADHD can be. Much goes unsaid in this article, not the least of which is that Ron
was my twin (fraternal, or nonidentical). Perhaps telling his story will make his
tragic loss and that of my family serve some purpose by benefiting you or others
you may know with ADHD.
Fatal One-Car Accident in Keene
By Andrea VanValkenburg
Staff Writer, Press Republican, Plattsburgh, NY
July 26, 2006
KEENE—An Elizabethtown man died Monday night when his vehicle
overturned after hitting an embankment. Ronald Barkley, 56, was travel-
ing southbound on the Bartlett Road in Keene around 10:06 
P. M . when he
failed to negotiate a small bend in the road and veered off the shoulder
of the right lane. According to Ray Brook–based State Police, . . . Barkley

KEENE—An Elizabethtown man died Monday night when his vehicle
overturned after hitting an embankment. Ronald Barkley, 56, was travel-
ing southbound on the Bartlett Road in Keene around 10:06 
P. M . when he
failed to negotiate a small bend in the road and veered off the shoulder
of the right lane. According to Ray Brook–based State Police, . . . Barkley

driving, Health, and Lifestyle Risks 245
My brother Ron had moderate to severe ADHD dating back to early child-
hood, which continued throughout his life—a life that ended abruptly and vio-
lently on a Monday evening in the summer of 2006. That fatal accident was
attributable indirectly to his ADHD and more directly to the condition’s impact
on the driving patterns and habits—speeding, risk taking, distractibility while
driving, use of alcohol, and rarely using a seat belt—that conspired to prematurely
end his life that fateful evening.
The context of Ron’s accident is worth noting. He was simply out for a plea-
sure drive along a rural dirt road on a fine summer evening, enjoying the beautiful
scenery of the Adirondack Mountains as he so often loved to do. He had finished
working a 10-hour shift as a chef and had a drink with our 92-year-old mother
shortly before grabbing some dinner and then departing on his pleasure drive in
a used van he had just bought and proudly fixed up. Perhaps he had also had a
few more drinks with his dinner before departing—we can only hazard a guess
about that, but his death certificate cited intoxication as a contributing factor in
his crash and death. A few days earlier we had spoken by phone, and he was the
happiest I had heard him lately, owing to his new job and the fact that, after years
of doing various odd jobs and mostly playing guitar and singing in rock bands, he
was finally going to get employee benefits.
You see, Ron had quit high school at age 16 after his second attempt at 10th
grade, which he was in the midst of failing again. He took up playing the guitar
and eventually became extremely proficient in rock and blues music. He would
go on to be in countless bands over the next 40 years along the East Coast and
in southern California. Clearly he was a gifted musician, and many would listen
in awe as he played. And he was the life of the party, always talking, cutting up
and making jokes, doing silly things, or just being entertaining. But he had no
head for business, a penchant for spending money beyond his means, and no time
was ejected from the GMC Safari minivan during the crash and was pinned
underneath as the car overturned. A passerby noticed the accident shortly
after it occurred and contacted area officials. Within minutes, State Police
and volunteers from the Keene Fire Department responded to the accident,
but Barkley was pronounced dead upon arrival. According to police, Bark-
ley was traveling at an unsafe speed when the accident occurred. Investiga-
tors believe he was not wearing a seat belt at the time of the accident. An
autopsy was conducted at the Adirondack Medical Center Tuesday, which
determined Barkley died of head trauma. No further information was avail-
able Tuesday night.

ley was traveling at an unsafe speed when the accident occurred. Investiga-
tors believe he was not wearing a seat belt at the time of the accident. An
autopsy was conducted at the Adirondack Medical Center Tuesday, which
determined Barkley died of head trauma. No further information was avail-
able Tuesday night.

246 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
management skills. He was quick to anger and was generally very impulsive, as
well as prone to boredom in whatever job he currently held. So he drifted from
band to band and, when not working in music, was likely to be working as a cook
in restaurants to help make ends meet. He had two failed marriages and many
short-term cohabiting relationships with women. He had a long history of alcohol,
tobacco, and, especially, cocaine abuse. He did a few stints in jail for drug posses-
sion or sale. He couldn’t seem to stay at any job for long. Eventually Ron fathered
three children but could never seem to provide the sustained care and support
they required, and so wound up with child support payments and often little or no
custody of his children.
More to the point here, Ron’s driving record was pretty atrocious. Nearly
every risk factor identified in research studies—mine and others’—was present
in Ron’s driving history, and in his tragic accident and consequently untimely
demise. It’s a powerful irony not lost on me as an expert on both ADHD and
its consequences for driving. For recent studies make it abundantly clear that
irreparable harm can befall those with ADHD (and others!) during this relatively
mundane activity. Just as clear is the fact that those driving problems are respon-
sive to medication treatments—treatments my brother was always too reluctant or
distracted to obtain or sustain for very long.
Problems with driving are found to be more frequent in different types of
studies looking at both teens and adults, but especially in adults clinically diag-
nosed with ADHD. Those particular studies find that adults with ADHD, like
my brother:
✓ Have slower and more variable reaction times
✓ Make more impulsive errors
✓ Vary in their steering
✓ Are far more inattentive and distractible while driving than other adults
✓ Are less likely to wear a seat belt or to keep their attention on the road
instead of fiddling with the stereo controls or radio stations, text messag-
ing or talking on cell phones while driving, or just socializing too much
with others in the vehicle
✓ Are more prone to road rage, or driving-related anger and aggressive use
of a motor vehicle when angered
These things were all true for my brother.
The most common cause of car accidents is driver inattention. It’s therefore
easy to see why adults with ADHD are far more likely to:

driving, Health, and Lifestyle Risks 247
✓ Have more severe crashes as measured by dol-
lar damages and injuries
✓ Drink alcohol and drive
✓ Be more impaired from that alcohol than oth-
ers
All of these were involved in my brother’s deadly acci-
dent.
Even more telling than the fact that adults with
ADHD have more driving incidents than others is how
much more often they have them:
✓ An average of three times more license suspensions/
revocations
✓ Fifty percent more crashes
✓ Nearly three times more speeding tickets
✓ More than twice as many accidents in which they were
at fault
✓ More than twice as many speeding tickets and total cita-
tions on their DMV records

much more often they have them:
✓ An average of three times more license suspensions/
revocations
✓ Fifty percent more crashes
✓ Nearly three times more speeding tickets
✓ More than twice as many accidents in which they were
at fault
✓ More than twice as many speeding tickets and total cita-
tions on their DMV records
Safety Strategies
Fortunately, recent studies have shown that driving performance can be improved
by the ADHD medications (stimulants and atomoxetine, although the stimulants
appear more effective here). Be diligent about this:
✓ If your ADHD is moderate to severe, be sure you’re taking your ADHD
medication whenever you drive.
✓ Also take your medication if operating vehicles or heavy equipment is part
of your work.
✓ What is also important here is to take your medication on a schedule that
ensures you’ll have adequate levels of medication in your bloodstream when you’re
most likely to be driving, such as morning and evening commuting or late-night
driving for work or social occasions. Earlier doses, even of extended-release com-
pounds, may wear off too soon; many adults take a “booster” of immediate-release
Adults with ADHD are 2.5
times more likely than other
adults to die prematurely
from misadventures like
car accidents.
Adults with ADHD not only get
three to five times as many
speeding tickets but also
get more parking tickets—
impulsively parking wherever
they are because they lack the
patience to look for a legal spot.

248 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
medication later in the day to make sure they’re covered. Your life and the lives of
others on the road are at stake.
✓ If you’re not taking medication or there’s a chance it has worn off, let some-
one else drive. Forget your pride; let your spouse, friend, or other licensed driver
get behind the wheel while you enjoy the scenery and fiddle with the music from
the passenger seat.
✓ Always (!) wear your seat belt. You can put a sticky note on your dash-
board—or, better yet, over the ignition—to remind you to put it on before head-
ing out. I don’t want you to wind up like my brother, who was thrown from his van
during a minor low-speed rollover and crushed by his own vehicle.
✓ Absolutely NO alcohol should be consumed when you plan to operate a motor
vehicle. Period.
✓ Stay off your cell phone while driving. This is one of the most frequent
sources of distraction while driving, contributing to your crash risk, and you, as an
adult with ADHD, do not need more distractions. If you need to use the phone or
answer a call, text message, or e-mail, get off the road! Then respond. Never, ever,
ever do it while you’re driving. If you simply cannot resist, buy an app that will
block your signals or deactivate your phone while the car is turned on and/or mov-
ing. Check the app store for your smartphone to see if they have an app that will
deactivate your cell phone when it is moving faster than it is possible for a human
to walk. For a review of these apps, go to insuramatch.com/blog/2017/08/apps-
prevent-phone-use-while-driving. These inventions could solve your cell phone or
texting dependency and that of other drivers in your family as well.
Avoiding Injuries
ADHD can be a life-threatening disorder.
You’re not just at risk for car accidents but for all kinds of accidental injuries.
Studies show that adults with ADHD:
• 
Already drive as if they are legally intoxicated even if they have had no

texting dependency and that of other drivers in your family as well.
Avoiding Injuries
ADHD can be a life-threatening disorder.
You’re not just at risk for car accidents but for all kinds of accidental injuries.
Studies show that adults with ADHD:
• 
Already drive as if they are legally intoxicated even if they have had no
alcohol
• 
Are more adversely affected in their driving by even low doses of alcohol
than drivers without ADHD

driving, Health, and Lifestyle Risks 249
According to various studies, kids with ADHD are more likely to spend time in a
hospital burn unit, to be involved in pedestrian–auto or bicyclist–auto accidents,
to be poisoned, to break bones, to have head injuries, and to lose teeth than other
kids. If you grew up with ADHD, the emergency room may have come to feel like
your home away from home. In fact, the accidents that children with ADHD have
tend to be more severe than those that other kids suffer too. And they have more
such accidents than others do. No wonder their mothers describe a lot more of
them as “accident prone.”
What about today? As you may well know, these risks continue into adult-
hood.
What can you do about it?
✓ Counteract your impulsiveness. Lack of impulse control may lead you to
leap in and act without considering the risk of injury. One patient of mine told me
that when he was a child he and his friends pitched in to build a ramp out of snow
that they could use to ride their sleds down a hill and then sail across a heavily
traveled town road. But when the ramp was finished, he was the only one actually
willing to try it. He wound up landing on a car with his sled rather than clearing
the road and was seriously injured. Such stories are, unfortunately, more common
in the life histories of adults with ADHD than in those without the disorder.
Practice the stop-the-action strategies in Chapter 16.
My recent research and studies done by others have found that adults with
ADHD are:
• 
Almost 50% more likely to have experienced a serious injury in their life-
times
• 
Four times as likely to have had a serious accidental poisoning
• 
More likely to file claims for worker’s compensation than other adults
One study found that children with ADHD (and other disruptive behavior prob-
lems) were three times more likely to die before the age of 46 than children
without these disorders (3% versus 1%).

250 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
✓ Take medication to reduce your distractibility and inattentiveness.
Riding your bike on a busy road or crossing the street on foot, you’re much less
likely than other adults to pay attention to the traffic and avoid potential acci-
dents. Also practice self-talk and mental imagery (see Chapters 17 and 18) to
help you focus your attention before starting a potentially risky activity and while
engaging in it.
✓ While you’re practicing self-talk, ask yourself whether you’re being child-
ishly rebellious or grandiose when you refuse to take conventional safety mea-
sures. Sixty-five percent or more of the kids who have ADHD are also defiant. If
you were among them as a child, you may have a pretty firmly entrenched habit of
ignoring other people’s rules and may think you can get away with ignoring a risk.
✓ Know your physical limits. Children with ADHD may be more clumsy
and less coordinated than others in their motor skills and development. Some-
times adults don’t fully catch up. If you know you’re not that coordinated, be

ignoring other people’s rules and may think you can get away with ignoring a risk.
✓ Know your physical limits. Children with ADHD may be more clumsy
and less coordinated than others in their motor skills and development. Some-
times adults don’t fully catch up. If you know you’re not that coordinated, be
humble, follow Rule 8 (see Chapter 23), and laugh at yourself—and then put on
that bike helmet, buckle your seat belt, or run on the sidewalk, not the street.
Making Sex a Less Risky Business
There are only a few studies on the sexual activities of teens and adults with
ADHD, two of which were done by my research team. We found that children
with ADHD started having intercourse an average of a
year earlier than other kids, had more partners, used con-
traception less, and ended up with nearly 10 times more
teen pregnancies (as either the father or the mother) and
four times as many sexually transmitted diseases. By age 27
(6 years later) the same group had become equal to the
general population in contraception and sexually trans-
mitted diseases, but those with ADHD were still having
kids younger.
What do we advise adults with ADHD to do? Well, there is absolutely no
research on interventions that may work for these problems, but here are some
obvious suggestions to try:
✓ If you left school before finishing sex education classes, get educated. Every
major bookstore has a section of books on sex and health. You will even come
across “owner’s manuals” that tell you how to take care of your body that will con-
tain chapters on sex. Use the Internet. The point here is to inform yourself about
sex, contraception, and related topics so you can better manage your sex life.
Websites like
advocatesforyouth.org
share information on
sexuality for teenagers
and young adults.


driving, Health, and Lifestyle Risks 251
✓ Unless you are planning on having a child, ALWAYS (!) use contracep-
tion. For women, this is easier because of birth control pills that can be taken
daily. Both men and women have to remember to carry and use condoms, how-
ever, since the pill does not prevent sexually transmitted diseases. Unfortunately,
this is just one more thing to be forgotten in the heat of the sexual moment. If you
have a history of impulsive sexual activity that you’ve regretted, get your doctor to
prescribe the morning-after pill, which can reduce the risk of conception after the
fact. Or consider getting the Norplant subcutaneous form of birth control, which
involves having a small device implanted (typically) just below the surface of the
skin on your upper arm that emits birth control medication over extended periods
of time. If you’re older and have had as many children as you want, a vasectomy
for men or a tubal ligation for women is an option you can consider to alleviate
the need to remember contraception. Still, however, you’ll need to take adequate
measures to avoid sexually transmitted diseases.
✓ Consider getting the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination, which
can now be given even to children. On average, people with ADHD have more
sex partners across their active sexual life than do other people. Besides a family
history of the disease, the single best predictor of cervical, throat, and anal can-
cer (all of which can be caused by an HPV infection) is the number of sex part-
ners. The HPV vaccination can prevent infection by a virus known to increase

sex partners across their active sexual life than do other people. Besides a family
history of the disease, the single best predictor of cervical, throat, and anal can-
cer (all of which can be caused by an HPV infection) is the number of sex part-
ners. The HPV vaccination can prevent infection by a virus known to increase
the risk for all of these cancers. A vaccine is now available for men as well as
women.
Reducing Health and Lifestyle Risks
As an adult with ADHD, you need to pay more attention to common health and
lifestyle risks than most adults. ADHD makes you:
Several studies by my friend and colleague Eric J. Mash, PhD, and his students
at the University of Calgary (Canada) found that pregnant women with ADHD
were less likely to be married and less likely to have planned their pregnancies
than women without ADHD. The mothers with ADHD were also more likely
to be anxious and depressed both before and after their children were born.
Before birth the mothers had less positive expectations about motherhood,
and after birth they had more difficulty with child rearing.

252 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
✓ More vulnerable to substance use and dependence (see Chapter 30),
including the legal substances caffeine, nicotine, and alcohol
✓ More likely to be overweight due to less exercise, more sedentary activi-
ties like watching TV or playing video games, and a less healthy diet than
other adults
✓ Less likely to have preventive medical and dental care and thus more
likely to end up with undetected problems that become bigger problems,
such as infected teeth that can cause sepsis or heart infections or obesity,
which can cause type 2 diabetes.
These ADHD-related health and lifestyle habits put you at greater risk
for coronary artery disease and cancer, among other medical and dental prob-
lems.
Again, ADHD can literally be a life-threatening illness. The very nature
of ADHD symptoms, particularly those of impaired inhibition and self-control,
puts you at risk for a shorter life span. If you can’t seriously consider the future
consequences of your behavior, you’re not going to be nearly concerned enough
about health-conscious behavior, such as exercise, proper diet, and moderate use
of caffeine, tobacco, and alcohol.
Studies show that half of all deaths in the United States are the result of life-
style choices in areas such as:
1. 
Tobacco use (19%)
2. 
Diet and physical activity (14%)
3. 
Alcohol use (5%)
4. 
Firearm use (2%)
5. 
Sexual behavior (1%)
6. 
Driving (1%)
7. 
Illicit drug use (1%)
Canadian research also found that 50% of all premature deaths could have
been prevented through lifestyle changes across similar domains.

driving, Health, and Lifestyle Risks 253
Then there’s conscientiousness, considered one of five major personality
dimensions. To be conscientious is to tend toward the opposite of ADHD symp-
toms—to control impulses, think about the consequences of your actions, persist
toward goals, and so forth. We now know that conscientiousness is linked to your
risk for various health problems and even to your life expectancy.
Because you have ADHD symptoms in place of innate conscientiousness,
you’re going to need more assistance from medical and health professionals who
are expert in the management of these health risks and lifestyle problem areas, in
the form of smoking cessation programs, dietary management, exercise regimens,
and so forth.

Because you have ADHD symptoms in place of innate conscientiousness,
you’re going to need more assistance from medical and health professionals who
are expert in the management of these health risks and lifestyle problem areas, in
the form of smoking cessation programs, dietary management, exercise regimens,
and so forth.
Don’t let ADHD shorten your life expectancy because of its association with these
risk factors! Take whatever measures you can to (1) control your ADHD and (2)
strive for a healthy lifestyle now. ADHD seems to take a higher toll over time.
What can you do to start protecting your health and longevity today?
People diagnosed with ADHD during adulthood were about as active physi-
cally as adults in the general population. But adults (age 27) who had had
ADHD since childhood and were followed to adulthood were significantly
less likely to get regular routine exercise (44% versus 69% of the general
population). If this pattern continues, these adults will be more prone to health
problems stemming from lack of exercise later in life.
✓ Make an appointment for a physical with your doctor if it’s been a while
since you had one or you’ve never had one as an adult. This is a status check to
see what problems or issues are developing and to try to head them off early with
better preventive medical care. You avoid medical care at your own long-term risk,
so don’t play the odds thinking that because you feel well or have no obvious cur-
rent medical problems some are not festering unseen or undetected. Get a baseline
physical and follow the advice your doctor may give you.
✓ If you smoke, ask your doctor to recommend a smok-
ing cessation program to get you to stop.
✓ Drinking a lot? It’s hard to be the judge of your own
behavior, especially if you’re in denial. But if someone else
tells you the amount you’re drinking is excessive, try to lis-
ten. Consider making a little check mark on a small piece of
If you’re overweight, ADHD
medication can be doubly
beneficial to you since it
often causes weight loss.

254 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
paper every time you have a drink and then
look at the pattern over a week. Is it more
than you used to drink? Is it more than
your family and friends drink? Do you get
hangovers often or just feel slow and slug-
gish in the mornings after drinking? Talk to
your doctor, who is there to help, not judge.
If you have a problem, ask your doctor to
enroll you in a nearby alcohol rehabilitation
program and Alcoholics Anonymous (AA)
group or another ongoing support program
for recovering alcoholics.
✓ Ditto with drugs. Your doctor can
help you enroll in a drug detox clinic or
other local program.
✓ Be sure to see a dentist. Dental
problems or diseases left unchecked could cause you to lose some or all of your
teeth, require a partial or full set of dentures, or lead to more extensive dental
or gum surgery, or possibly even abscessed teeth, which have the potential to be
lethal if that infection happens to enter your bloodstream and attack your heart.
✓ Start a plan of regular physical exercise each week. All of us struggle with
this sound advice, but that’s no excuse for any of us not to try to make this a more
routine part of our lifestyle. There is also the added benefit that physical exercise
done regularly helps people with ADHD manage their symptoms better and pro-
vides a great release for all that extra energy and hyperactivity. My patients and

this sound advice, but that’s no excuse for any of us not to try to make this a more
routine part of our lifestyle. There is also the added benefit that physical exercise
done regularly helps people with ADHD manage their symptoms better and pro-
vides a great release for all that extra energy and hyperactivity. My patients and
other adults with ADHD tell me that running, biking, swimming, other aerobic
sports, and even martial arts, have proven helpful to them in reducing their symp-
toms by channeling their energy into a healthier outlet.
✓ Consider medication to treat your ADHD. Often the medical and den-
tal risks identified in our research on adults with ADHD stem from unmanaged
ADHD and the disorganizing effects it has on their life. Getting your ADHD
under control with medication can help you pursue preventive medicine and den-
tistry as required for all adults.
Uninsured and can’t afford to see
a doctor?
•
 
See if a parent, sibling, or other
relative would cover this cost
for you.
•
 
Check with the local county
or city hospital about getting
a physical at the county’s or
state’s expense if you fall below
the poverty line in your income.
•
 
Call your local department of
social services to see if they can
direct you to free care clinics.


255
29
Other Mental
and Emotional Problems
If you’ve been struggling for years with the symptoms of ADHD without knowing
what’s wrong, being diagnosed can be a huge relief. Not only do you finally have
an explanation for your problems. You also have access to proven treatments that
can alleviate your symptoms and put success within your reach.
But what if medications and the self-help strategies described in this book
aren’t enough? What do you do if your days still seem awfully hard to get through?
If you still can’t get ahead at work, finish your education, enjoy your family and
social life? If you still feel miserable and frustrated much of the time, what could
be going on?
Consider the possibility that ADHD is not
the only mental or emotional condition you have.
In Chapter 1, I said that 80% or more of adults with
ADHD have at least one other psychiatric disorder.
More than 50% have at least two other disorders.
These are the most common culprits, listed roughly
from most to least prevalent:
✓ Oppositional defiant disorder (ODD)
✓ Conduct disorder (CD)/antisocial personality disorder (ASPD)
✓ Substance use disorders
✓ Anxiety
✓ Depression
✓ Personality disorders (such as antisocial or borderline personality disorder)
✓ Binge-eating disorder or bulimia (in women)
✓ Learning disabilities
Having another disorder besides
ADHD doesn’t make you unusual
or beyond help. Only 1 in 5 adults
with ADHD has ADHD alone.

256 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
The rates at which these conditions have been found in adults with ADHD
vary from study to study, so this order is not set in stone. But it will give you an
idea of what might be ailing you when ADHD doesn’t explain all the obstacles in
the way of your having the life you want.
In the following pages I’ll give you a basic understanding of what some of
these conditions look (and feel) like and also how they are usually treated by a
mental health professional. Of course the only way to be sure that you have any of
these disorders is to get a thorough evaluation and diagnosis.
If you’ve already been diagnosed with ADHD, why wouldn’t the evaluator have
noticed anything else that was wrong too? In an ideal world, your evaluation for

mental health professional. Of course the only way to be sure that you have any of
these disorders is to get a thorough evaluation and diagnosis.
If you’ve already been diagnosed with ADHD, why wouldn’t the evaluator have
noticed anything else that was wrong too? In an ideal world, your evaluation for
ADHD would have uncovered any other conditions you have. But on this imper-
fect planet, a lot of factors could have kept other conditions from revealing them-
selves. Maybe you and the evaluator were so fixed on the idea of ADHD that you
downplayed other symptoms that lurked in the background of your history. Maybe
these other conditions were so mild at the time that they really didn’t qualify
for a diagnosis. It’s always possible that the diagnosing practitioner was inexpe-
rienced—in general or in identifying psychiatric disorders other than ADHD.
It could even be that your doctor saw the signs of other problems but believed
it would be best to have you focus on ADHD and get that under control before
being asked both to accept that you have other conditions on top of it and to
participate in managing them.
Call your doctor, ideally the same one who diagnosed you with ADHD, and
ask for a consultation. Be prepared to describe the symptoms you’re experiencing,
the impairments that seem to be “left over” from your ADHD treatment, and the
areas of life in which you’re struggling. The following will help you help the prac-
titioner by zeroing in on what’s wrong.
Do you often feel mad at the world?
Is losing your temper a regular, probably daily, occurrence?
Do you think people view you as a maverick, a rule breaker, a
rebel?

other Mental and emotional Problems 257
Oppositional Defiant Disorder
The more “yes” answers you gave, the more likely it is that you could have ODD.
If what’s making you miserable, despite an improvement in your ADHD symp-
toms thanks to medication, is feeling like a misfit, always the “bad boy,” misun-
derstood and disliked, hemmed in and pushed around, ODD may be the cause.
If you remember feeling hostile and stubborn as a child, behaving in ways that
adults defined as defiant and that always seemed to get you in trouble, you could
have had ODD then even if it wasn’t diagnosed. Among kids who did have these
symptoms, the disorder persists into adulthood in fully half. What causes it? We’re not
sure. It could be the limited emotional self-control that is inherent in ADHD,
and being constantly at odds with adults trying to make them behave in ways
they can’t because of their deficits in executive function. By the time kids have
had ADHD symptoms for 2 or 3 years, 45–84% of them have ODD too. But it
also could be that the emotion regulation problems presented by ADHD create a
major predisposition to problems with managing anger and frustration. Certainly,
the impulsive emotion associated with ADHD leads to a greater quickness to
anger, impatience, and low frustration tolerance, which can be the initial spark
for the fires of ODD. Venting and acting out with others leads to lots of conflict,
especially with authority figures. Maybe that’s why adults with ODD are more
likely to get fired, even though poor work performance ratings are more often
traceable to ADHD.
Treatment: In many cases, the medication used to treat ADHD also improves
ODD. By facilitating emotional control and other types of self-control that help
you fit into society more comfortably, the medication you’re already taking may

likely to get fired, even though poor work performance ratings are more often
traceable to ADHD.
Treatment: In many cases, the medication used to treat ADHD also improves
ODD. By facilitating emotional control and other types of self-control that help
you fit into society more comfortably, the medication you’re already taking may
diminish the ODD symptoms over time. If the ADHD medications have not com-
pletely managed your impulsive emotions, consider enrolling in an anger
Do you tend to defend yourself relentlessly when someone says
you’ve done something wrong?
Have many of the jobs you’ve left ended because you were fired?

258 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
management course with a mental health professional, nearby mental health
clinic, or community college. Or try the self-help methods in W. Robert Nay’s
Taking Charge of Anger (Guilford Press, 2012). Also, some adults require a second
medication just to manage this aspect of their problems beyond the medications
traditionally used to treat ADHD. Ask your doctor about them.
Conduct Disorder/Antisocial Personality Disorder
Many who answered “yes” to a lot of the questions above wouldn’t even be reading
this book. But to those who are: If you have a history of criminal or near-criminal
behavior, you may still be struggling despite treating your ADHD because you’ve
become somewhat marginalized in society. It could take time and professional
counseling to get you back into the mainstream.
You could think of CD as a step up (or down) from ODD. Kids and teens who
have CD aren’t just defiant. They lie, steal, fight, carry weapons, set fires, and/or
commit sexual assault—generally violating the rights of others and social norms
and laws. While the great majority of adults with ADHD don’t qualify for this
diagnosis, 17–35% can remember fitting this profile closely enough to have
Did you get in trouble with the law as a child or teen?
Run away from home?
Get caught for truancy or curfew violations?
How about now? Do you have a criminal record?
Do you push the envelope on laws, community ordinances, rules
and regulations?
Have you been kicked out of the house?
Have a history of alcohol and/or drug abuse?
Do you get involved in bar fights?
Have you ever been accused of sexual harassment or assault?

other Mental and emotional Problems 259
qualified for the diagnosis when younger. Those who still fit this picture as
adults—anywhere from 7 to 21% of those who still have ADHD (with my own
follow-up study revealing the higher number)—would be diagnosed currently with
ASPD, which is essentially CD grown up. How does someone develop such severe
behavior problems? Partly as a result of the problems with
inhibition and self-regulation that go with ADHD. But those
symptoms can’t explain everything, since most people with
ADHD don’t end up with CD or ASPD too. More likely, it’s
ADHD combined with other factors including genetic risks
for CD, drug-abuse-related disorders in the parents, a disrup-
tive home life, social disadvantage, being raised by a single
parent, reduced parental monitoring of a teen’s activities,
and affiliation with delinquent or drug-using peers in adoles-
cence. As noted in Chapter 30, drug abuse and antisocial
behavior seem to go hand in hand.
Treatment: See the treatment options listed for ODD. Also, get help for
substance use if you have a problem there. And always remember that antisocial

and affiliation with delinquent or drug-using peers in adoles-
cence. As noted in Chapter 30, drug abuse and antisocial
behavior seem to go hand in hand.
Treatment: See the treatment options listed for ODD. Also, get help for
substance use if you have a problem there. And always remember that antisocial
friends are no friends at all. Do what you can to exit a social scene that encourages
crime and other antisocial behavior. Keep busy with hobbies if you must. Ideally,
though, identify a better social network that encourages positive, productive
activity. If necessary, move to a different neighborhood with fewer antisocial peers
to interact with on a frequent basis.
Substance use
disorders affect a
significant minority
of adults with ADHD.
They are addressed
separately in
Chapter 30.

Does anticipating things you don’t want to do make you extremely
nervous?
Do you worry about a laundry list of possible events all the time?
Do you have any phobias (as in extreme fear of spiders, heights)?
Do social occasions fill you with fear, often making you cancel at
the last minute?
Do you hate speaking before a group?

260 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
Anxiety
Anxiety can be hard to recognize. It’s usually defined as a pattern of abnormal
fears and worries, mainly unrealistic ones, often about things that will never
occur. In your case, though, it may seem perfectly reasonable to avoid entering
the same social situation in which you’ve been humiliated dozens of times before.
Or it’s entirely logical to quake in fear before addressing a meeting at work when
the other times you’ve lost your place, forgotten your materials, or frozen during
the question-and-answer period. Isn’t it sensible to protect yourself from disasters
that actually have occurred before? It may very well be, but that doesn’t mean that
you’re not suffering from clinical anxiety that could be treated, making your life a
whole lot easier. About a quarter of the kids with ADHD have an anxiety disor-
der, but among adults the rate climbs to 17–52%. In our follow-up study of children
with ADHD in Wisconsin, my colleague Mariellen Fischer and I found that the
longer you have ADHD as an adult, the more likely it is that you’ll develop an
anxiety disorder too. I think it makes sense to assume that a history of chronic
failure in various domains of major life activity could be to blame. But there may
also be some shared genetic risk between the two disorders. Watch for new find-
ings in the research news.
Treatment: There are many psychotherapy treatments for anxiety, especially
cognitive-behavioral therapy, as well as drugs proven to help. Remember that the
ADHD nonstimulant atomoxetine may be of some benefit since it does not exac-
erbate anxiety and may treat it to some extent. Ask your doctor what’s best for
you.
Do you often find it hard to get out of bed and feel exhausted even
after plenty of sleep?
Do you feel blue more days than not?
Do you snap at people, feeling easily irritated?
Is your appetite dead . . . or in overdrive?
Do you feel bored with and uninterested in activities
you usually enjoy?

you.
Do you often find it hard to get out of bed and feel exhausted even
after plenty of sleep?
Do you feel blue more days than not?
Do you snap at people, feeling easily irritated?
Is your appetite dead . . . or in overdrive?
Do you feel bored with and uninterested in activities
you usually enjoy?

other Mental and emotional Problems 261
Depression
“Yes” answers to many of those questions are clues that you may be suffering from
depression. But the research on the risk of depression among adults with ADHD
is rather mixed. So we can’t say that you should be on the lookout for these symp-
toms because you’re strongly predisposed to become depressed at some point.
Overall, the risk for some type of depression is more than three times greater in
people with ADHD than in the general population samples we’ve used as control
groups. Interestingly, unlike anxiety, my Wisconsin follow-up study showed that
depression dropped from 28% in childhood to 18% by age 27. Research shows that
there may be a shared genetic risk between the two disorders. That is, having
one disorder in your family seems to predispose you to having biological relatives
with the other. But the environment could be to blame too. Both depression and
ADHD are associated with a greater exposure to social turmoil, stress, disadvan-
tage, and abuse.
Treatment: As for anxiety, there are many effective medications for depres-
sion (antidepressants), as well as proven cognitive-behavioral approaches.
A few studies have suggested that adults with ADHD might be more at risk
for bipolar disorder (manic depression), but most studies, including my own,
have not found this to be the case. Adults with bipolar disorder do, however,
have a higher risk for ADHD. That risk is 20–25% for adult-onset bipolar
disorder, 35–45% for adolescent onset, and 80–97% if the bipolar disorder
started in childhood.

262
30
Drugs and Crime
“When I was a teenager, and even into my 20s, I was hanging around with a few
guys who, like me, were looking for thrills on weekend nights. So we went barhop-
ping and did a lot of drinking and often just waited for someone else in the bar to
say something we didn’t like or thought was stupid and we would start a fight with
them. I got into so many fights, I can’t remember how many. We got thrown out of
a lot of bars for doing this, and we often had some injuries from it, but that didn’t
stop us from going out again the next weekend. Maybe we were just bored or try-
ing to show off for the women in the bars, but for whatever reason, the drinking
just made us more brave and also more impulsive and we just did stupid things as
a result.
“Once we left a bar after lots of beers and saw a car in the lot with the keys
left in it. One of my friends said, ‘Hey, let’s go for a joy ride!’ So we did. We were
all liquored up and daring each other to drive the car faster, take it into fields or
golf courses and spin doughnut rings, and just tear ass around neighborhoods until
we wrecked the car and got arrested for grand theft auto. Boy, we were young,
dumb, drunk, and stupid in those days. And my impulsiveness just got worse when
I drank. I’m surprised I’m still alive to talk about it.
“But one day I met a guy from high school who I knew and who just always
seemed to have his act together and be on the right course. He talked me into trying
an alcohol detox clinic where he volunteered to work as a crisis counselor. When

dumb, drunk, and stupid in those days. And my impulsiveness just got worse when
I drank. I’m surprised I’m still alive to talk about it.
“But one day I met a guy from high school who I knew and who just always
seemed to have his act together and be on the right course. He talked me into trying
an alcohol detox clinic where he volunteered to work as a crisis counselor. When
I got cleaned up from the booze, I tried out and passed the fireman’s exam and
became a local volunteer firefighter after my initial training for it. That eventually
led me to a paid job with the town as a firefighter. And then I met Karen, who’s
now my wife, and she really cleaned up my life and gave me a great reason to live,
be straight, stay off the booze, get my ADHD diagnosed and treated, and keep my
life together. All those guys I used to hang out and barhop with are now in jail. I
am the only one who made something of my life.”

drugs and Crime 263
There is no question that adults with ADHD are more likely to use various sub-
stances than other adults. Alcohol is the most frequently abused substance—up
to a third of adults with ADHD have or have had a drinking problem. But mari-
juana, cocaine or other stimulants, prescription drugs, and opiates (heroin, mor-
phine, opium) are also abused, though at a slightly lower rate.
The trouble is that the nature of substance use
disorders, combined with the nature of ADHD, can
make it awfully difficult to see yourself as having a
“real” problem. People in the general population often
take a long time to recognize that they need help and
then seek it. With self-awareness limited by the execu-
tive function deficits of ADHD, admitting that you
have and then addressing a substance use disorder can
be even harder.
If you’re starting to wonder whether you feel bad despite ADHD treat-
ment because you might qualify for a diagnosis of drug dependence or abuse,
this chapter will help you decide what to do.
What Are You Getting Out of Substance Use?
Giving up a substance we enjoy—especially one that we’ve come to believe we
need—is hardly a pleasant prospect. Most experts agree that people are often at
least trying to get some positive effect from the substances they overuse or abuse.
For many of us, alcohol relaxes us and lowers our inhibitions, often making it
easier to be sociable and alleviating shyness. But for someone with ADHD and
already low inhibition, that could be a social disaster. Nicotine and caffeine stimu-
late us when we’re tired and need to focus. But these typical effects don’t com-
pletely explain why adults with ADHD are likely to use substances more often
than others—to the detriment of their health and well-being. Maybe knowing
what you’re getting out of the substances that are starting to be a problem for you
will help you turn a corner that will preserve your health—or even save your life.
Let’s look at alcohol first.
Alcohol
Alcohol does not treat the symptoms of ADHD. In fact, it could make them worse.
After just a drink or two, alcohol lowers your inhibition, which means it probably
gets you into even more trouble than you already have with your impulses.
Use of cocaine and other hard
drugs and abuse of prescription
drugs are associated more with
CD or other antisocial behavior
(see Chapter 29) than ADHD.

After just a drink or two, alcohol lowers your inhibition, which means it probably
gets you into even more trouble than you already have with your impulses.
Use of cocaine and other hard
drugs and abuse of prescription
drugs are associated more with
CD or other antisocial behavior
(see Chapter 29) than ADHD.

264 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
So what could make you keep drinking? Impulsiveness itself is certainly a
candidate. If much of your social life takes place at bars and other places where
drinks are served, it just might be hard to resist joining in.
Much earlier in this book I said you had a lot of options for shaping your
environment to manage your ADHD and take charge of your life so ADHD
doesn’t take charge of you. Your friends are certainly a big part of your environ-
ment. Are they the right companions for you?
After those first few drinks, alcohol is known to restrict one’s memory for
past events, creating a sort of tunnel vision that focuses awareness mainly on the
moment, so you can ignore your past problems. Perhaps that’s what makes it so
appealing to many adults with ADHD: It helps you forget your troubles and just
live in the moment without a care for recent problems or future hazards.
Is drinking typically at the center of your get-togethers with
friends?
Do you feel like drinking clears your mind of things you don’t want
to think about?
Do you make your worst impulsive decisions after drinking? Such
as?

drugs and Crime 265
Alcohol is also known to reduce anxiety in some adults. If those things you
don’t want to think about make you anxious, alcohol may just ease your fears. At
least temporarily.
Marijuana
Like alcohol, marijuana is consumed in much greater quantities over the lifetime
of adults with ADHD than other adults. Why? That’s not clear to me. One possi-
bility is that marijuana may be achieving a similar effect to that of alcohol: helping
people with ADHD forget their miseries, focusing their mind just on the moment,
and perhaps reducing any unusual levels of anxiety. We do know that those with a
history of cigarette smoking are most likely to move on to using marijuana as well.
And we know that adults with ADHD are more likely to smoke cigarettes than
other adults . . . which leads to one of the most interesting findings about ADHD
and substance use:
Cigarettes/Nicotine
Scott Kollins, PhD, and colleagues at Duke University published a 2019
study that shows a direct connection between ADHD and risk for smoking
cigarettes. Following 15,197 adolescents into young adulthood, they found a
linear relationship between the level of ADHD symptoms and regular smok-
ing. Specifically, the risk of regular smoking increased significantly with every
additional ADHD symptom. Not only that, but the more ADHD symptoms the
teens had, the earlier they started smoking.
Most people wouldn’t consider smoking a drug use disorder, but I think it deserves
to be viewed this way for a couple of reasons. For one thing, nicotine may very well
be the most addictive substance on the planet. For another, we know that smoking
comes with some of the deadliest health consequences of any habit we humans
have invented (such as lung and other cancers, heart disease). Dependence on
or abuse of nicotine is exceptionally common among a sizable minority of adults
with ADHD, with their risk for current nicotine use being nearly twice that of the
general population. What makes it so seductive?

comes with some of the deadliest health consequences of any habit we humans
have invented (such as lung and other cancers, heart disease). Dependence on
or abuse of nicotine is exceptionally common among a sizable minority of adults
with ADHD, with their risk for current nicotine use being nearly twice that of the
general population. What makes it so seductive?
Some scientists have suggested that this risk for smoking is a form of self-
medication. Nicotine has a stimulant-like action on the dopamine transporter in
the striatum of the brain that’s very similar to the effects of methylphenidate (see
Step Three) on that site. Smoking may actually treat the symptoms of ADHD

266 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
to some degree. Here’s a case, though, where the risk (say, of cancer and heart
disease) far outweighs the benefits, especially considering that we have safe, legal
prescription stimulants to provide the same positive effect.
I took Ritalin for a long time as a kid. Some people have told me that’s
probably why I’ve developed a cocaine habit. Is that true?
Some adults may wonder if having been treated for their ADHD with prescription
stimulants as children may have predisposed them toward greater drug use and
abuse as adults, especially involving illegal stimulants, or the illegal use of pre-
scription stimulants. I’ve reviewed the literature on whether treatment with pre-
scription stimulants leads to abuse of stimulants like nicotine, cocaine, crack, or
methamphetamine. I can reassure you that at least 16 studies have found no such
association between childhood stimulant treatment and adult drug use or abuse.
While one study did so, its results were not properly analyzed and so probably
yielded a false positive relationship between childhood stimulant use and adult
drug use. So the overwhelming majority of the evidence is against such a risk. A
few studies, including my own research, showed that being treated with stimulants
for ADHD in childhood may actually have protected a child or teen from engaging
in certain types of drug use as a young adult, provided that treatment was sustained
during adolescence. The effect was a pretty weak one, however, and has not been
found consistently across studies. So it’s not clear that early treatment can reduce
drug abuse risk. But what is pretty definitive is that early treatment with ADHD
medications does not contribute to a greater risk of drug abuse later in life.
Read on to find out more about why you might be using cocaine.
Cocaine and Other Hard Drugs
Use of illegal drugs like cocaine and “meth” or abuse of legal prescription medi-
cations could very well be an attempt to self-medicate ADHD, as with nicotine,
since some illegal drugs are stimulants. Talk about a wrong-headed decision!
?
Caffeine is also considered a stimulant. Not surprisingly, we found that young
adults with ADHD in particular were likely to consume more caffeinated drinks
per week than young adults without ADHD.

cations could very well be an attempt to self-medicate ADHD, as with nicotine,
since some illegal drugs are stimulants. Talk about a wrong-headed decision!
?
Caffeine is also considered a stimulant. Not surprisingly, we found that young
adults with ADHD in particular were likely to consume more caffeinated drinks
per week than young adults without ADHD.

drugs and Crime 267
These drugs, and all the negative consequences of addiction to them, are literally
killers.
Why would you choose a dangerous illegal substance instead of a safe legal
one? As mentioned earlier, use of cocaine and other hard drugs is associated more
with CD, crime, and ASPD (see Chapter 29) than with ADHD. Research clearly
shows that teens and young adults with ADHD who are likely to use substances
excessively, or who are using or abusing illegal substances, are also the most likely
to engage in various antisocial or criminal activities. And sub-
stance abuse and criminal activity have a synergistic effect—more
crime results in greater drug use, which in turn contributes to yet
more crime.
Let’s say you have a crack habit. How are you going to buy
these expensive drugs? You may turn to stealing money or prop-
erty to obtain the means to buy your drugs of abuse. If you drink
alcohol excessively, you may be more likely to get into fights with
others. And in both cases, you may be more inclined than others
to carry and even use weapons. Similarly, if you engage in certain
criminal activities, such as stealing or fighting, you may be doing so with others
also prone to antisocial behavior. And those people are more likely to be using
drugs and may influence you to do so.
Another link between drug use and antisocial, criminal behavior is impulsiv-
ity. The more impulsive you are, studies show, the more likely you are to try an
illegal drug on a dare or even a mere suggestion. The same appears to be true of
the likelihood of engaging in illegal activities (crime): The more impulsive you
are—the less likely you are to consider the consequences of your actions—the
more likely it is that you’ll yield to a whim or a dare to go along on some criminal
misadventure like breaking into a house.
Then we have the kind of social group you hang around with in your spare
time. As with drinking, if you pal around with people who are likely to be involved
in illegal activities, they may influence you to do the same. Gangs are the most
extreme example of this kind of negative social influence, but it doesn’t take an
organized group like that to exert an influence, especially with ADHD to egg you
on. All you may need is a couple of antisocial, drug-using friends to be pushed in
this direction.
Our research found that yet another contributor to the risk for engaging in
criminal activities is a person’s level of education. People with ADHD who had
less education, especially if they did not graduate from high school, were far more
likely to be doing antisocial things than people with ADHD who graduated or
went on after high school to further their education.
Finally, there’s the severity of the ADHD and its persistence from childhood
Antisocial behavior
predisposes you
to substance use,
and substance use
predisposes you to
antisocial behavior.

likely to be doing antisocial things than people with ADHD who graduated or
went on after high school to further their education.
Finally, there’s the severity of the ADHD and its persistence from childhood
Antisocial behavior
predisposes you
to substance use,
and substance use
predisposes you to
antisocial behavior.

268 CHAnGe YouR SITuATIon
to adolescence. These factors had a lesser effect but were still important predictors
of certain types of criminal behavior in adulthood.
Avoiding—or Getting Out of—the Trap of Drug Use
✓ For the substantial minority of adults with ADHD who have substance
use problems (20–30%), drug detoxification and rehabilitation programs are likely
to be recommended. It’s difficult to treat your ADHD when you’re abusing drugs
that can make your ADHD worse or lead to other psychological problems in their
own right. If you’re not getting much benefit from attempts to treat your ADHD,
consider whether you need to tackle a substance use problem first or at least simul-
taneously.
✓ Aggressive treatment of the ADHD is still critical, no matter when you
start it.
✓ Change your environment if it’s leading you into activities that are making
your life worse. Look for new friends (this is one reason 12-step programs like AA
are so attractive—they provide a new social arena for those trying to start a new,
substance-free phase of their lives). Choose leisure activities that don’t center on
bars.
✓ Get educated. If your education was cut short by ADHD, get back to it
now. A better education means better job opportunities, which can mean not only
better opportunities to make a living legally but also removing yourself from living
every day on the margins of society.
Substance use and criminal activity—no matter how minor—are major pit-
falls for those with adult ADHD. Steer away from them now and start leading the
life you deserve.
The type of crime most associated with ADHD in my research was using, pos-
sessing, and selling illegal drugs and stealing money to buy drugs. About one
in four people with ADHD, at a minimum, are likely to have drug use and abuse
issues as adults.
Are you sure you want to be among them?

269
APPENDIX
A Closer Look at ADHD Symptoms
Official Diagnostic Criteria for ADHD
The official diagnostic criteria used by mental health professionals to diagnose ADHD
come from the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
or DSM-5. Practitioners question patients (including adults, although the criteria were
developed for use with children) about the 18 symptoms listed below. Nine of these refer
to problems with inattention and nine to problems with being hyperactive or impulsive.
DSM-5 Criteria for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
A. A persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity–impulsivity that interferes with func-
tioning or development, as characterized by (1) and/or (2):
1. Inattention: Six (or more) of the following symptoms have persisted for at least 6 months to
a degree that is inconsistent with developmental level and that negatively impacts directly
on social and academic/occupational activities:
Note: The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of oppositional behavior, defiance, hos-
tility, or failure to understand tasks or instructions. For older adolescents and adults (age 17
and older), at least five symptoms are required.
a. Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless mistakes in schoolwork,

Note: The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of oppositional behavior, defiance, hos-
tility, or failure to understand tasks or instructions. For older adolescents and adults (age 17
and older), at least five symptoms are required.
a. Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless mistakes in schoolwork,
at work, or during other activities (e.g., overlooks or misses details, work is inaccurate).
b. Often has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play activities (e.g., has difficulty
remaining focused during lectures, conversations, or lengthy reading).
c. Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly (e.g., mind seems elsewhere, even
in the absence of any obvious distraction).
Reprinted with permission from Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition. Copyright ©
2013 American Psychiatric Association. All rights reserved.

270 Appendix
d. Often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish schoolwork, chores,
or duties in the workplace (e.g., starts tasks but quickly loses focus and is easily side-
tracked).
e. Often has difficulty organizing tasks and activities (e.g., difficulty managing sequential
tasks; difficulty keeping materials and belongings in order; messy, disorganized work;
has poor time management; fails to meet deadlines).
f. Often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to engage in tasks that require sustained men-
tal effort (e.g., schoolwork or homework; for older adolescents and adults, preparing
records, completing forms, reviewing lengthy papers).
g. Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities (e.g., school materials, pencils, books,
tools, wallets, keys, paperwork, eyeglasses, mobile telephones).
h. Is often easily distracted by extraneous stimuli (for older adolescents and adults, may
include unrelated thoughts).
i. Is often forgetful in daily activities (e.g., doing chores, running errands; for older ado-
lescents and adults, returning calls, paying bills, keeping appointments).
2. Hyperactivity and impulsivity: Six (or more) of the following symptoms have persisted for
at least 6 months to a degree that is inconsistent with developmental level and that nega-
tively impacts directly on social and academic/occupational activities:
Note: The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of oppositional behavior, defiance, hos-
tility, or a failure to understand tasks or instructions. For older adolescents and adults (age
17 and older), at least five symptoms are required.
a. Often fidgets with or taps hands or feet or squirms in seat.
b. Often leaves seat in situations when remaining seated is expected (e.g., leaves his or
her place in the classroom, in the office or other workplace, or in other situations that
require remaining in place).
c. Often runs about or climbs in situations where it is inappropriate. (Note: In adolescents
or adults, may be limited to feeling restless.)
d. Often unable to play or engage in leisure activities quietly.
e. Is often “on the go,” acting as if “driven by a motor” (e.g., is unable to be or uncomfort-
able being still for extended time, as in restaurants, meetings; may be experienced by
others as being restless or difficult to keep up with).
f. Often talks excessively.
g. Often blurts out an answer before a question has been completed (e.g., completes peo-
ple’s sentences; cannot wait for turn in conversation).

able being still for extended time, as in restaurants, meetings; may be experienced by
others as being restless or difficult to keep up with).
f. Often talks excessively.
g. Often blurts out an answer before a question has been completed (e.g., completes peo-
ple’s sentences; cannot wait for turn in conversation).
h. Often has difficulty waiting his or her turn (e.g., while waiting in line).
i. Often interrupts or intrudes on others (e.g., butts into conversations, games, or activi-
ties; may start using other people’s things without asking or receiving permission; for
adolescents and adults, may intrude into or take over what others are doing).
B. Several inattentive or hyperactive–impulsive symptoms were present prior to age 12 years.

Appendix 271
C. Several inattentive or hyperactive–impulsive symptoms are present in two or more settings (e.g.,
at home, school, or work; with friends or relatives; in other activities).
D. There is clear evidence that the symptoms interfere with, or reduce the quality of social, aca-
demic, or occupational functioning.
E. The symptoms do not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia or another psychotic
disorder and are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., mood disorder, anxiety
disorder, dissociative disorder, personality disorder, substance intoxication or withdrawal).
Specify whether:
314.01 (F90.2) Combined presentation: If both Criterion A1 (inattention) and Criterion
A2 (hyperactivity–impulsivity) are met for the past 6 months.
314.00 (F90.0) Predominantly inattentive presentation: If Criterion A1 (inattention) is
met but Criterion A2 (hyperactivity–impulsivity) is not met for the past 6 months.
314.01 (F90.1) Predominantly hyperactive/impulsive presentation: If Criterion A2
(hyperactivity–impulsivity) is met and Criterion A1 (inattention) is not met for the past 6
months.
Specify if:
In partial remission: When full criteria were previously met, fewer than the full criteria
have been met for the past 6 months, and the symptoms still result in impairment in social,
academic, or occupational functioning.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis are present, and
symptoms result in no more than minor impairments in social or occupational functioning.
Moderate: Symptoms or functional impairment between “mild” and “severe” are present.
Severe: Many symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis, or several symp-
toms that are particularly severe, are present, or the symptoms result in marked impairment
in social or occupational functioning.
The word often appears at the beginning of each symptom to ensure that these symp-
toms are occurring most of the time and are present more often than is the case in other
people of your age group. It is also important that these symptoms have been present for
at least 6 months to ensure that these are not simply transient problems but are a stable
part of your recent life.
Additional Symptoms Associated with ADHD in Adults
To get a better idea of whether you fit the picture of adult ADHD, see how many of the
symptoms on pages 272–276 represent your experiences.

at least 6 months to ensure that these are not simply transient problems but are a stable
part of your recent life.
Additional Symptoms Associated with ADHD in Adults
To get a better idea of whether you fit the picture of adult ADHD, see how many of the
symptoms on pages 272–276 represent your experiences.

272 Appendix
Symptom
Adults with
ADHD (%)
Adults in the
community (%)
1. Find it difficult to tolerate waiting; impatient 75 5
2. Make decisions impulsively 79 3
3. Unable to inhibit my reactions or responses to
events or others
61 2
4. Have difficulty stopping my activities or behavior
when I should do so
72 2
5. Have difficulty changing my behavior when I am
given feedback about my mistakes
68 4
6. Easily distracted by irrelevant thoughts when I
must concentrate on something
96 3
7. Prone to daydreaming when I should be
concentrating on something
89 8
8. Procrastinate or put off doing things until the last
minute
94 27
9. Make impulsive comments to others 56 3
10. Likely to take shortcuts in my work and not do
all that I am supposed to do
65 6
11. Likely to skip out on work early if its boring or
hard to do
58 5
12. Can’t seem to defer gratification or to put off
doing things that are rewarding now so as to
work for a later goal
69 2
13. Likely to do things without considering the
consequences for doing them
60 1
14. Change my plans at the last minute on a whim
or last-minute impulse
72 9
15. Start a project or task without reading or
listening to directions carefully
89 11
16. Poor sense of time 63 3
17. Waste or mismanage my time 86 5
Note. Results are from ADHD in Adults: What the Science Says by Russell A. Barkley, Kevin R. Murphy, and
Mariellen Fischer (Guilford Press, 2008).

Appendix 273
Symptom
Adults with
ADHD (%)
Adults in the
community (%)
18. Fail to consider past relevant events or past
personal experiences before responding to
situations
44 1
19. Do not think about the future as much as others
of my age seem to do
47 8
20. Not prepared for work or assigned tasks 58 1
21. Fail to meet deadlines for assignments 65 1
22. Have trouble planning ahead or preparing for
upcoming events
81 6
23. Forget to do things I am supposed to do 82 5
24. Have difficulties with mental arithmetic 55 14
25. Not able to comprehend what I read as well as I
should be able to do; have to reread material to
get its meaning
81 12
26. Can’t seem to remember what I previously
heard or read about
77 12
27. Can’t seem to accomplish the goals I set for
myself
84 7
28. Late for work or scheduled appointments 55 5
29. Trouble organizing my thoughts or thinking
clearly
75 2
30. Not aware of things I say or do 39 1
31. Can’t seem to hold in mind things I need to
remember to do
83 7
32. Have difficulty being objective about things that
affect me
64 5
33. Find it hard to take other people’s perspectives
about a problem or situation
48 6
34. Have difficulty keeping in mind the purpose or
goal of my activities
51 1
35. Forget the point I was trying to make when
talking to others
75 2

32. Have difficulty being objective about things that
affect me
64 5
33. Find it hard to take other people’s perspectives
about a problem or situation
48 6
34. Have difficulty keeping in mind the purpose or
goal of my activities
51 1
35. Forget the point I was trying to make when
talking to others
75 2

274 Appendix
Symptom
Adults with
ADHD (%)
Adults in the
community (%)
36. When shown something complicated to do,
cannot keep the information in mind so as to
imitate or do it correctly
53 1
37. Give poor attention to details in my work 60 1
38. Find it difficult to keep track of several activities
at once
68 8
39. Can’t seem to get things done unless there is an
immediate deadline
89 6
40. Dislike work or school activities where I must
think more than usual
60 2
41. Have difficulty judging how much time it will take
to do something or get somewhere
72 6
42. Have trouble motivating myself to start work 80 6
43. Quick to get angry or become upset 63 7
44. Easily frustrated 86 8
45. Overreact emotionally 68 6
46. Have difficulty motivating myself to stick with my
work and get it done
84 4
47. Can’t seem to persist at things I do not find
interesting
96 13
48. Do not put as much effort into my work as I
should or as others are able to do
60 4
49. Have trouble staying alert or awake in boring
situations
86 11
50. Easily excited by activities going on around me 70 15
51. Not motivated to prepare in advance for things I
know I am supposed to do
80 4
52. Can’t seem to sustain my concentration on
reading, paperwork, lectures, or work
91 7
53. Easily bored 81 9
54. Others tell me I am lazy or unmotivated 57 2
55. Have to depend on others to help me get my
work done
44 2

Appendix 275
Symptom
Adults with
ADHD (%)
Adults in the
community (%)
56. Things must have an immediate payoff for me or
I do not seem to get them done
70 2
57. Have trouble completing one activity before
starting a new one
87 7
58. Have difficulty resisting the urge to do
something fun or more interesting when I am
supposed to be working
87 5
59. Can’t seem to sustain friendships or close
relationships as long as other people
46 5
60. Inconsistent in the quality or quantity of my work
performance
70 2
61. Don’t seem to worry about future events as
much as others
46 10
62. Don’t think about or talk things over with myself
before doing something
48 4
63. Unable to work as well as others without
supervision or frequent instruction
40 2
64. Have trouble doing what I tell myself to do 81 5
65. Poor follow-through on promises or
commitments I may make to others
68 3
66. Lack self- discipline 81 5
67. Have difficulty using sound judgment in problem
situations or when under stress
51 1
68. Trouble following the rules in a situation 61 4
69. Not very flexible in my behavior or approach to a
situation; overly rigid in how I like things done
53 16
70. Have trouble organizing my thoughts 80 4
71. Have difficulties saying what I want to say 70 6
72. Unable to come up with or invent as many
solutions to problems as others seem to do
37 5
73. Often at a loss for words when I want to explain
something to others
58 5
74. Have trouble putting my thoughts down in
writing as well or as quickly as others
58 6

71. Have difficulties saying what I want to say 70 6
72. Unable to come up with or invent as many
solutions to problems as others seem to do
37 5
73. Often at a loss for words when I want to explain
something to others
58 5
74. Have trouble putting my thoughts down in
writing as well or as quickly as others
58 6

276 Appendix
Symptom
Adults with
ADHD (%)
Adults in the
community (%)
75. Feel I am not as creative or inventive as others of
my level of intelligence
27 13
76. In trying to accomplish goals or assignments,
find I am not able to think of as many ways of
doing things as others
41 5
77. Have trouble learning new or complex activities
as well as others
56 4
78. Have difficulty explaining things in their proper
order or sequence
67 1
79. Can’t seem to get to the point of my
explanations as quickly as others
75 9
80. Have trouble doing things in their proper order
or sequence
76 3
81. Unable to “think on my feet” or respond as
effectively as others to unexpected events
37 3
82. Clumsy; not as coordinated in my movements
as others
30 6
83. Poor or sloppy handwriting 63 21
84. Have difficulty arranging or doing my work by its
priority or importance; can’t “prioritize” well
84 4
85. Slower to react to unexpected events 37 5
86. Get silly, clown around, or act foolishly when I
should be serious
58 4
87. Can’t seem to remember things I have done or
places I have been as well as others seem to do
62 14
88. Accident prone 35 3
89. More likely to drive a motor vehicle much faster
than others (excessive speeding)
67 13
90. Have difficulties managing my money or credit
cards
73 8
91. I am less able to recall events from my childhood
compared to others
54 25

277
Resources
Sources of Scientific Data
The facts, figures, and recommendations in this book are based on thousands of research
studies conducted over the last century. But many of the extant findings reported in this
book come from two studies that my colleagues and I did with funding from the National
Institute of Mental Health.
• 
One study followed children with ADHD into adulthood. This research told us a
lot about how often ADHD persists past childhood and how it changes (or stays
the same) when kids with the disorder grow up.
• 
The other study looked at adults who had referred themselves to our clinic and
ended up diagnosed with ADHD. We compared them with two other groups of
adults: a group of patients being treated for other disorders but not ADHD, and a
group of adults in the general population (who had not been diagnosed with any
psychiatric disorder). This study gave us a much more detailed understanding of
what ADHD consists of and the unique challenges it poses for adults.
You can read more about both of these studies (and many others) in this book:
Barkley, R. A., Murphy, K. R., & Fischer, M. (2008). ADHD in adults: What the science
says. New York: Guilford Press.
• 
Here you’ll find a lot of charts and graphs that show the data we came up with. In
this book the follow-up study of children into adulthood (called a longitudinal study)
is referred to as the “Milwaukee study.” The study comparing three different groups
of adults is referred to as the “UMASS study.” You can also read a lot more details
on specific aspects of adult ADHD if you’re interested in one particular area. The
list of references at the back of this book will also lead you to even further sources of
information. You can order the book from The Guilford Press (www.guilford.com) or

of adults is referred to as the “UMASS study.” You can also read a lot more details
on specific aspects of adult ADHD if you’re interested in one particular area. The
list of references at the back of this book will also lead you to even further sources of
information. You can order the book from The Guilford Press (www.guilford.com) or
look for it at your local bookstore or library.

278 Resources
Additional Reading
The following books can give you additional insight into and advice for living with adult
ADHD. Please note that much of what you’ll read in them is based on clinical experience
instead of research studies, but I’ve found that each of these books has something valuable
to offer:
Adler, L., & Florence, M. (2007). Scattered minds: Hope and help for adults with attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons.
• 
A concise, clear introduction to adult ADHD written by the director of the Adult
ADHD Program at the New York University School of Medicine.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disor-
ders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
• 
You can find the DSM at most libraries if you’re interested in reading about the
diagnostic criteria for ADHD or other disorders.
Barkley, R. A. (1994). ADHD in adults [videotape]. New York: Guilford Press.
• 
If reading is difficult for you, watching a tape might be ideal.
Barkley, R. A. (2012). Executive functions: What they are, how they work, and why they
evolved. New York: Guilford Press.
• 
The book where I present the most recent version of my theory of executive func-
tioning, described in Step Two.
Barkley, R. A. (2015). Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: A handbook for diagnosis and
treatment (4th ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
• 
Written for professionals, but if you want the comprehensive manual to refer to,
this is it.
Barkley, R. A. (2017). When an adult you love has ADHD: Professional advice for parents,
partners, and siblings. Washington, DC: APA LifeTools.
• 
The first and only book to date to address the audience of parents, partners, and
siblings of adults who have ADHD. A guide to understanding adult ADHD and
assisting your loved one with its various problems.
Boissiere, P. (2018). Thriving with adult ADHD: Skills to strengthen executive functioning.
San Antonio, TX: Althea Press.
• 
Provides a variety of relatively simple life hacks for coping with the executive
functioning deficits linked to adult ADHD.
Bramer, J. S. (1996). Succeeding in college with attention deficit hyperactivity disorders: Issues
and strategies for students, counselors, and educators. Plantation, FL: Specialty Press.
Call the ADD WareHouse at 800-233-9273 to order.
• 
A valuable resource if you’re in or going back to college.
Brown, T. E. (2006). Attention deficit disorder: The unfocused mind in children and adults.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
• 
A fine summation of the executive deficits and other cognitive problems associ-
ated with ADHD.

Call the ADD WareHouse at 800-233-9273 to order.
• 
A valuable resource if you’re in or going back to college.
Brown, T. E. (2006). Attention deficit disorder: The unfocused mind in children and adults.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
• 
A fine summation of the executive deficits and other cognitive problems associ-
ated with ADHD.

Resources 279
CHADD. (2000). The CHADD information and resource guide to AD/HD. Landover, MD:
Author. Go to CHADD.org or Call CHADD at 301-306-7070 to order.
• 
This organization dedicated to supporting children and adults with ADHD stays
up on all the latest resources, listed here.
Evans, N. J., Brodo, E. M., Brown, K. R., & Wilke, A. K. (2017). Disability in higher educa-
tion: A social justice approach. Hoboken, NJ: Jossey-Bass.
Gordon, M., & Keiser, S. (Eds.). (2000). Accommodations in higher education under the
Americans with Disabilities Act: A no-nonsense guide for clinicians, educators, adminis-
trators, and lawyers. New York: GSI and Guilford Press.
Hallowell, E. M., & Ratey, J. J. (2005). Delivered from distraction: Getting the most out of life
with attention deficit disorder. New York: Ballantine Books.
Hallowell, E. M., & Ratey, J. J. (2011). Driven to distraction (2nd ed.). New York: Pantheon.
• 
Very readable books by authors who have ADHD and who stress a “strength-
based,” positive approach to living with the disorder.
Kelly, K., & Ramundo, P. (2006). You mean I’m not lazy, stupid, or crazy? The classic self-help
book for adults with attention deficit disorder. New York: Scribner Books.
• 
One of the earliest books published on adult ADHD and its symptoms. Although
a bit dated now it still contains useful insights into the disorder and helpful tips for
coping with its various deficits.
Kohlberg, J., & Nadeau, K. (2016). ADD-friendly ways to organize your life. New York:
Routledge.
• 
Contains excellent suggestions for improving the organizational and other execu-
tive function deficits in daily life often seen in ADHD (formerly ADD).
Levrini, A., & Prevatt, F. (2012). Succeeding with adult ADHD: Daily strategies to help you
achieve your goals and manage your life. Washington, DC: APA LifeTools.
• 
How to address the organizational, motivational, and time management problems
associated with ADHD in adults.
Nadeau, K. G. (2007). Survival guide for college students with ADD or LD (2nd ed.). Wash-
ington, DC: Magination Press. Call the ADD WareHouse at 800-233-9273 to order.
• 
If you’re a young adult in college or an older adult going back, you’ll find worthy
assistance here.
Nadeau, K. G. (2015). The ADHD guide to career success (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge.
• 
Provides some sage advice on accommodations to seek in the workplace and how
to decide on the best employment settings that may better match with your ADHD
symptoms as well as aptitudes.
Nadeau, K. G., & Quinn, P. (2002). Understanding women with AD/HD. Silver Spring,
MD: Advantage.
• 
A good resource for women with ADHD.
Orlov, M. (2010). The ADHD effect on marriage: Understand and rebuild your relationship
in six steps. Plantation, FL: Specialty Press.
• 
One of the few books addressing the issues related to the impact of adult ADHD
on marriage and what to do to improve your relationship.

A good resource for women with ADHD.
Orlov, M. (2010). The ADHD effect on marriage: Understand and rebuild your relationship
in six steps. Plantation, FL: Specialty Press.
• 
One of the few books addressing the issues related to the impact of adult ADHD
on marriage and what to do to improve your relationship.

280 Resources
Orlov, M., & Kohlenberg, N. (2014). The couples guide to thriving with ADHD. Plantation,
FL: Specialty Press.
• 
An informative guide to strategies couples can utilize when one or both have
adult ADHD.
Pera, G. (2008). Is it you, me, or adult A.D.D.? San Francisco: 1201 Alarm Press.
• 
Meant for the spouses or partners of adults with ADHD, this book is friendly and
full of helpful anecdotes and examples.
Ramsay, J. R. (2012). Nonmedication treatments for adult ADHD: Evaluating impact on daily
functioning and well-being. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
• 
Although intended for professionals, this book can be informative for the edu-
cated adult with ADHD who wants a summation of the latest research findings on
the various psychological treatments available for adult ADHD.
Ramsay, J. R., & Rostain, A. L. (2014). The adult ADHD tool kit. New York: Routledge.
• 
An excellent book for assisting with the time management, planning, motiva-
tional, and other executive deficits associated with ADHD in adults.
Ramsay, J. R., & Rostain, A. L. (2014). Cognitive behavioral therapy for adult ADHD: An
integrative psychosocial and medical approach. New York: Routledge.
• 
A professional book providing a detailed account of how to conduct CBT for adult
ADHD that focuses on the executive function deficits and other problems associated
with the disorder.
Sarkis, S. M. (2006). 10 simple solutions to adult ADD: How to overcome distraction and
accomplish your goals. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
• 
Though a bit dated now, many of these suggestions are still worth considering in
solving some of the problems in everyday life that exist with ADHD (ADD).
Sarkis, S. M., & Klein, K. (2009). ADD and your money: A guide to personal finance for
adults with attention-deficit disorder. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
• 
This is a richly detailed book of advice on how to manage finances if you are an
adult with ADHD and to date is the only book focusing solely on this topic.
Sarkis, S., & Tuckman, A. (2015). Natural relief for adult ADHD: Complementary strategies
for increasing focus, attention, and motivation with or without medication. Oakland,
CA: New Harbinger.
• 
A fine review for getting acquainted with the various alternative treatments for
ADHD, many of which are popular although they lack scientific evidence for their
effectiveness.
Solanto, M. V. (2013). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for adult ADHD: Targeting executive
dysfunction. New York: Guilford Press.
• 
A professional clinical manual for conducting a specialized form of CBT for the
executive deficits associated with adult ADHD. Provides step-by-step guidelines and
clinical handouts for each of the sessions in this evidence-based training program.

Solanto, M. V. (2013). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for adult ADHD: Targeting executive
dysfunction. New York: Guilford Press.
• 
A professional clinical manual for conducting a specialized form of CBT for the
executive deficits associated with adult ADHD. Provides step-by-step guidelines and
clinical handouts for each of the sessions in this evidence-based training program.

Resources 281
Solden, S. (2012). Women with attention deficit disorder (2nd ed.). Nevada City, CA: Under-
wood Books.
• 
A pioneer in the area of books specifically for women with ADHD; audiotape
also available.
Solden, S., & Frank, M. (2019). A radical guide for women with ADHD: Embrace neurodi-
versity, live boldly, and break through barriers. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
• 
An inspiring book for women with ADHD on how to pursue constructive change,
positive thinking, and their full potential despite having ADHD.
Surman, C., & Bilkey, T. (2014). Fast minds: How to thrive if you have ADHD (or think you
might). New York: Berkley Publishing/Penguin Random House.
• 
A fine introduction to adult ADHD with clear, effective solutions for managing
it.
Tuckman, A. (2009). More attention, less deficit: Success strategies for adults with ADHD.
Plantation, FL: Specialty Press.
• 
A fine description of ADHD and especially the numerous ways that adults with
the disorder can deal with it.
Tuckman, A. (2012). Understand your brain, get more done: The ADHD executive functions
workbook. Plantation, Fl: Specialty Press.
• 
An informative guide to various methods for dealing with deficits in executive
functioning associated with adult ADHD.
Tuckman, A. (2019). ADHD after dark: Better sex life, better relationship. New York: Rout-
ledge.
• 
The first book to address the topic of adult ADHD and sexual behavior in inti-
mate relationships.
Young, J. (2007). ADHD grown up: A guide to adolescent and adult ADHD. New York:
Norton.
• 
A fine but somewhat dated resource for both professionals and people with adult
ADHD.
Wilder, J. (2017). Help for women with ADHD: My simple strategies for conquering chaos.
New York: CreateSpace Independent Publishing.
• 
Provides a wide variety of easy-to-follow recommendations for dealing with time
management and organization.
Zylowska, L., & Mitchell, J. T. (2021). Mindfulness for adult ADHD: A clinician’s guide. New
York: Guilford Press.
• 
An excellent clinical manual not only summarizing the research on the use of
this treatment with adults with ADHD but, better yet, providing step-by-step clini-
cal instructions on how to implement their approach to managing ADHD in adults.

282 Resources
Zylowska, L., & Siegel, D. (2012). The mindfulness prescription for adult ADHD. Durban,
South Africa: Trumpeter Publishing.
• 
The first book to set forth the use of secular mindfulness meditation for use
with adults who have ADHD. Although there wasn’t much evidence supporting its
effectiveness when the book was published, subsequent research has suggested some
promise for this approach in addressing some of the problems linked to adult ADHD.
For a more current version, see the preceding book by Zylowska and Mitchell.
Rating Scales
The following scales are tools for clinicians. Each scale comes with a limited photocopy
license, which allows purchasers to reproduce the forms and score sheets and yields con-
siderable cost savings over other available scales. The large format and sturdy wire binding

For a more current version, see the preceding book by Zylowska and Mitchell.
Rating Scales
The following scales are tools for clinicians. Each scale comes with a limited photocopy
license, which allows purchasers to reproduce the forms and score sheets and yields con-
siderable cost savings over other available scales. The large format and sturdy wire binding
facilitate photocopying.
Barkley, R. A. (2011). Barkley Adult ADHD Rating Scale–IV (BAARS-IV). New York:
Guilford Press.
• 
The Barkley Adult ADHD Rating Scale–IV (BAARS-IV) offers an essential tool
for assessing current ADHD symptoms and domains of impairment as well as recol-
lections of childhood symptoms.
Barkley, R. A. (2011). Barkley Deficits in Executive Functioning Scale (BDEFS for Adults).
New York: Guilford Press.
• 
The Barkley Deficits in Executive Functioning Scale (BDEFS) is an empirically
based tool for evaluating dimensions of adult executive functioning in daily life.
Barkley, R. A. (2011). Barkley Functional Impairment Scale (BFIS for Adults). New York:
Guilford Press.
• 
The Barkley Functional Impairment Scale (BFIS) is the first empirically based,
norm-referenced tool designed to evaluate possible impairment in 15 major domains
of psychosocial functioning in adults. Clinicians must assess functional impairment
before diagnosing a mental disorder or evaluating a disability claim.
Websites
General/Comprehensive Sites
ADDitude Magazine
www.additudemag.com
• 
A wealth of help for adults, from workplace resources and legal rights to household tips,
travel advice, and health recommendations for adults with ADHD.
Attention Deficit Disorder Association (ADDA)
www.add.org
• 
International nonprofit organization devoted to adult ADHD. Numerous resources,
links, support groups, and products.

Resources 283
Russell A. Barkley, PhD
www.russellbarkley.org
Canadian ADHD Resource Alliance (CADDRA)
www.caddra.ca
• 
Members are physicians, but there’s lots of information for people who have ADHD—
children, adolescents, and adults.
Centre for ADHD Awareness, Canada (CADDAC)
www.caddac.ca
• 
A nonprofit advocacy organization dedicated to education and advocacy for people
with ADHD.
Children and Adults with Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (CHADD)
www.chadd.org
• 
The largest and oldest nonprofit organization in the United States dedicated to helping
people with ADHD. Many resources, links, and support groups for adults and adolescents
as well as children.
Learning Disabilities Association of America (LDA)
www.ldaamerica.org
• 
Help for adults with learning disabilities, from screening and evaluation through
accommodations for the GED and more.
National Attention Deficit Disorder Information and Support Service (ADDISS)
www.addiss.co.uk
• 
UK nonprofit organization whose website offers lots of resources and information and
a link to the Adult ADHD Support Network.
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
www.nimh.nih.gov
• 
Check here for updates on the latest research.
Sources for Books, Other Reading Materials, and Products
ADD WareHouse
www.addwarehouse.com
• 
A great online store for books, newsletters, DVDs, and products like timers.
Specific Populations
ADHD and Marriage
www.adhdmarriage.com
• 
A blog and forum operated by Ned Hallowell, author of Driven to Distraction and Deliv-
ered from Distraction, and Melissa Orlov specifically on how ADHD affects marital rela-
tionships.

A great online store for books, newsletters, DVDs, and products like timers.
Specific Populations
ADHD and Marriage
www.adhdmarriage.com
• 
A blog and forum operated by Ned Hallowell, author of Driven to Distraction and Deliv-
ered from Distraction, and Melissa Orlov specifically on how ADHD affects marital rela-
tionships.

284 Resources
ADHD Roller Coaster with Gina Pera: All about Adult ADHD—Especially Relation-
ships
www.adhdrollercoaster.org
• 
A blog by Gina Pera, with links to current findings on the disorder and also informa-
tion on being the partner of someone with ADHD.
Coaches and Coaching
ADD Coach Academy: www.addca.com
ADHD Coaches Organization: www.adhdcoaches.org
International Coaching Federation: www.coachfederation.org
How to Find Adult ADHD Professionals and Clinics
You can always go online and search for ADHD professionals or specialists in your city
or state. You can also specifically search www.chadd.org and www.additudemag.com for
ADHD professionals in your area. Or check out the www.chadd.org website to see if they
have a chapter near your city. If so, call that chapter president and ask for recommenda-
tions on professionals. They will be very familiar with services in the area that their mem-
bers will have used for their own ADHD or that of their loved ones.

285
Academic functioning. See School
functioning
Accepting your ADHD. See
Owning your ADHD
Accidental injuries, 243, 248–250
Accommodations (educational or
workplace)
college ADHD liaison and, 204
interviewing for the job and,
219–220
note taking, 205
overview, 202–203, 220
reasons to seek professional
help, 15, 42
test taking, 207
Accountability, 102, 186–187,
216–217
Adderall (amphetamine), 122, 124,
129, 136, 148–149. See also
Medication; Stimulants
Addiction. See also Drug and
alcohol use
in addition to ADHD, 16
medication for ADHD and, 123,
125, 126
nonstimulants and, 139
ADHD Symptom Tracking Scale
form, 153–155
Adolescence history, 22–23
Adverse consequences. See
Consequences, adverse;
Impairments
Alarms, 217, 226
Alcohol and drug use. See also
Addiction; Impairments
in addition to ADHD, 16
avoiding or stopping, 268
driving and, 246–247
examining your problems and,
12
medications for ADHD and,
125, 126, 131, 139
overview, 262–268
reducing health and lifestyle
risks, 252, 253–254
ruling out other causes of
symptoms and, 39
substance use disorders, 263
Alpha-2 hypertension drugs, 117,
120–122. See also Medication;
Nonstimulants
Americans with Disabilities
Act, 219–220. See
also Accommodations
(educational or workplace)
Amphetamine. See also
Medication; Stimulants
Adderall, 122, 124, 129, 136,
148–149
Dexedrine, 122, 124
Dextrostat, 122, 124
Vyvanse, 122, 124, 134–135,
136, 148
Antisocial personality disorder
(ASPD), 16, 255, 258–259
Anxiety disorders
in addition to ADHD, 16
considering medication and,
114, 119
overview, 260
presentations of ADHD and, 36
stimulants and, 129
Assessment and evaluation.
See Professional help and
evaluations
Assignment calendar, 204
Atomoxetine (Strattera),
137–141. See also Medication;
Nonstimulants
Attention
criteria for an ADHD diagnosis
and, 27–30, 269–270
distractions and, 58–61
educational functioning and,
205–206
neurological factors and,
116–117
presentations of ADHD and,
34–36
psychological testing and, 25
Autism spectrum disorders, 16
Automation, 229
Avoidance, 42
Bill paying
medications for ADHD and,
113, 150–151

criteria for an ADHD diagnosis
and, 27–30, 269–270
distractions and, 58–61
educational functioning and,
205–206
neurological factors and,
116–117
presentations of ADHD and,
34–36
psychological testing and, 25
Autism spectrum disorders, 16
Automation, 229
Avoidance, 42
Bill paying
medications for ADHD and,
113, 150–151
overview, 24–25, 224–226,
228–229
Biological factors, 103, 111. See also
Genetic factors; Neurological
factors
Bipolar disorder, 16, 261
Borderline personality disorder,
255
Brain functioning. See
Neurological factors
Brain injury, 39, 46
Breaking goals and tasks into
smaller units, 80, 100,
171–177, 178–182, 183–188
Breaks, taking, 186
Budgets, 227, 228–229
Bupropion (Wellbutrin), 143.
See also Medication;
Nonstimulants
Caffeine use, 265
Calendars, 204, 221
Career. See Work functioning
Causes of ADHD
developmental processes, 39,
72–73, 104
genetic factors, 24, 46, 103–104,
117, 237–238
neurological factors, 46, 60, 70,
99, 103, 104, 111, 116–117,
118, 121
Cell phones and other tools to
help externalize information,
98, 100, 104, 171–177,
191–193, 221, 248. See also
Smart devices
Index

286 Index
Childhood, 22–23, 72
Childhood ADHD
criteria for an ADHD diagnosis
and, 28
educational functioning and,
199–202
examining your problems and,
7, 8–10
parenting and, 237–238
research regarding, 2
when to seek out a professional
evaluation and, 13
Chores
accepting a diagnosis of ADHD
and, 34
evaluating how symptoms affect
your life, 31
externalizing key information
and, 171–177
feel the future and, 178–182
relationships and, 236
Chunking strategy, 80, 100, 183–188
Cigarettes, 253, 265–266
Coaching
educational functioning and,
203–204
employment and, 213, 220–221
overview, 41
Cocaine use, 266–268
College ADHD liaison, 204
Combined presentation of ADHD,
34–36
Communication
criteria for an ADHD diagnosis
and, 29
having a sense of humor and,
194–196
self-awareness and, 74–76
social violations you may not
realize you’re committing,
234
verbal working memory and,
83–84, 166–170
Community resources, 228
Comorbidity, 16, 24, 36
Compensation for ADHD, 9–10,
97–100, 105–106. See also
Strategies to deal with your
ADHD; Tools to deal with
your ADHD
Complicated tasks, 80, 171–177,
178–182, 183–188, 189–193
Comprehension. See also
Listening; Reading
employment and, 222
overview, 47
tips for handling homework
and, 206–207
verbal working memory and,
83–84, 86–87
Concentration, 28–29, 206
Concerta (methylphenidate), 122,
124, 132–133, 148. See also
Medication; Stimulants
Conduct disorder (CD), 16, 36,
258–259
Conflict resolution, 241
Consequences, adverse. See also
Foresight; Impairments
evaluating how symptoms affect
your life, 30–31
feel the future and, 178–182
impulse control and, 61–62
planning and problem solving
and, 93
reducing health and lifestyle
risks, 253
seeing the diagnosis as an
explanation rather than an
excuse, 102
self-control and, 66
Control, self. See Self-control/self-
management
Cooperation, 78–79
Coping strategies, 7, 41, 97–100.
See also Strategies to deal
with your ADHD
Credit cards. See Debt
Criminal behavior and legal
problems, 86, 262–263,
267–268
Criteria for an ADHD diagnosis,
27–30, 269–271. See also
Diagnosis
Cross-temporal organization of
behavioral contingencies, 68
Cues, 171–177, 204–205, 221.
See also Externalizing
information
Cylert. See Medication; Stimulants
Daily responsibilities
accepting a diagnosis of ADHD
and, 34

problems, 86, 262–263,
267–268
Criteria for an ADHD diagnosis,
27–30, 269–271. See also
Diagnosis
Cross-temporal organization of
behavioral contingencies, 68
Cues, 171–177, 204–205, 221.
See also Externalizing
information
Cylert. See Medication; Stimulants
Daily responsibilities
accepting a diagnosis of ADHD
and, 34
evaluating how symptoms affect
your life, 31
externalizing key information
and, 171–177
feel the future and, 178–182
relationships and, 236
Dating, 34, 235–236
Deadlines, 183–188
Debt, 12, 151, 225, 228–230, 231
Decision making, 93, 163–164
Delaying gratification. See also
Executive functioning
criteria for an ADHD diagnosis
and, 29
development of executive
functioning skills and, 72–73
examining your problems and,
53–54
nonverbal working memory and,
78, 81
overview, 47
self-control and, 66–67
Denial of ADHD diagnosis, 101
Dental care, 254
Depression and related disorders
in addition to ADHD, 16
considering medication and,
114, 119
overview, 261
presentations of ADHD and,
36
Developmental processes, 39,
72–73, 104
Dexedrine (amphetamine), 122,
124. See also Medication;
Stimulants
Dextrostat (amphetamine), 122,
124. See also Medication;
Stimulants
Diagnosis. See also Mental and
emotional disorders; Owning
your ADHD
accepting, 31–36
answers you can expect to
receive from an evaluation,
26–27
benefits of getting a diagnosis
and, 41–43
coexisting disorders and, 16
considering medication and,
118–119
criteria for an ADHD diagnosis
and, 27–30, 269–271
disagreeing with, 36–39
educational functioning and,
200
examining your problems and,
10–11, 30–31
as an explanation rather than
an excuse, 102
feelings regarding, 101–102
preparing for the evaluation,
22–25
presentations of ADHD, 34–36
relationships and, 235
where to obtain, 19–21
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders (DSM-5),
11, 27–28, 269–271
Dietary factors, 6, 12, 104, 252
Digital aids and other tools to help
externalize information, 98,
100, 171–177, 191–193
Disability specialist in the human
resources department, 221
Distraction
avoiding injuries and, 248–250
overview, 58–61
replacing distractions with
reinforcers, 99–100
working environment and,
216–217
Domains of impairment. See
Impairments
Dopamine, 117, 124–125, 137–138
Drinking problems. See Alcohol
and drug use

Index 287
Driving
avoiding injuries and, 248–250
considering medication and, 114
diagnosis and, 29, 34
evaluating how symptoms affect
your life, 31
history of for the evaluation,
23–24
overview, 242–248
Drug and alcohol use. See also
Addiction; Impairments
in addition to ADHD, 16
avoiding or stopping, 268
driving and, 246–247
examining your problems and,
12
medications for ADHD and,
125, 126, 131, 139
overview, 262–268
reducing health and lifestyle
risks, 252, 253–254
ruling out other causes of
symptoms and, 39
substance use disorders, 263
Eating, 6, 12, 104, 252. See also
Health-related behaviors and
choices
Educational accommodations
college ADHD liaison and, 204
interviewing for the job and,
219–220
note taking, 205
overview, 202–203, 220
reasons to seek professional
help, 15, 42
test taking, 207
Educational functioning. See
School functioning
Emotional problems, 178–182,
226–227, 255–257. See also
Impairments; Mental and
emotional disorders
Emotional regulation. See also
Executive functioning; Self-
control/self-management
examining your problems and,
12, 31, 54–55
overview, 47, 87–92
parenting and, 237

Educational functioning. See
School functioning
Emotional problems, 178–182,
226–227, 255–257. See also
Impairments; Mental and
emotional disorders
Emotional regulation. See also
Executive functioning; Self-
control/self-management
examining your problems and,
12, 31, 54–55
overview, 47, 87–92
parenting and, 237
relationships and, 233
stimulants and, 129–130
Employment. See Work
functioning
Ethical codes, 86
Evaluation, professional. See
Professional help and
evaluations
Everyday rules for success. See
Rules for everyday success
Evidence-based treatments,
109–111
Exam, physical, 145–146, 252, 253
Executive functioning. See also
Delaying gratification;
Inhibition; Nonverbal
working memory; Planning;
Problem solving; Self-
awareness; Self-control/self-
management; Verbal working
memory
examining in yourself, 172–173
external and tangible problem
solving and, 189–193
externalizing key information,
171–177
fitting treatments, strategies,
tools, and coping methods to
your specific problems and,
97–100
neurological factors and,
116–117
nonverbal working memory,
76–82
overview, 47–48, 69–73
planning and problem solving,
92–95
risk assessment and, 243
self-awareness, 73–76
self-regulation of emotion,
87–92
social interactions and, 234–235
verbal working memory, 82–87
Exercise
educational functioning and,
206, 208
employment and, 222
examining your problems and, 6
reducing health and lifestyle
risks, 253, 254
External and tangible problem
solving rule, 189–193
External motivation and
incentives, 183–188. See also
Motivation; Rewards
Externalizing information, 98,
100, 171–177, 191–193. See
also Tools to deal with your
ADHD
Family functioning. See also
Relationship functioning
considering medication and, 114
money management and, 228
myths regarding causes of
ADHD and, 104
overview, 235–236
parenting and, 31, 104, 236–240
Feel the future rule, 178–182
Fidgety behavior, 30, 58–61
Financial behaviors. See Money
management
Flexibility, 85–86, 100, 218
Focalin (methylphenidate), 121,
122, 124, 148–149. See also
Medication; Stimulants
Focus, 28–29, 34–36, 58–61
Foresight. See also Consequences,
adverse; Future, envisioning
nonverbal working memory and,
77–78, 80, 81
relationships and, 233–234
risk assessment and, 243
saying the past and the future,
166–170
seeing the past and the future,
163–165
self-control and, 68
sense of time and, 96–97
verbal working memory and, 85
Forgetfulness, 47
Friendships, 81, 241
Frustration, 47, 183–188, 189–193
Functioning, 9–10, 11–12. See also
Impairments
Future, envisioning. See also
Foresight; Goals
feel the future and, 178–182
nonverbal working memory and,
76–77, 78, 81
planning and problem solving
and, 92–95
saying the past and the future,
166–170
sense of time and, 96–97
verbal working memory and, 85
Genetic factors
effectiveness of medication
and, 117
overview, 46, 103–104
owning your ADHD and, 103
parenting and, 237–238
preparing for the evaluation
and, 24
Goals. See also Breaking goals
and tasks into smaller units;
Future, envisioning
breaking goals and tasks into
smaller units and, 100,
183–188
examining your problems and,
49–50
feel the future and, 178–182
money management and,
224–227
nonverbal working memory and,
80–81
overview, 47, 48
planning and problem solving
and, 92–95
Gratification delay. See Delaying
gratification
Guanfacine XR (Intuniv). See
Medication; Nonstimulants
Habits, 158
Hard drug use, 266–268

examining your problems and,
49–50
feel the future and, 178–182
money management and,
224–227
nonverbal working memory and,
80–81
overview, 47, 48
planning and problem solving
and, 92–95
Gratification delay. See Delaying
gratification
Guanfacine XR (Intuniv). See
Medication; Nonstimulants
Habits, 158
Hard drug use, 266–268

288 Index
Having a sense of humor rule,
194–196
Health problems
medications for ADHD and,
127, 139–140
physical exam and interview
prior to prescribing
medications and, 145–146
reducing health and lifestyle
risks, 252
ruling out other causes of
symptoms and, 15
Health-related behaviors and
choices
considering medication and, 114
educational functioning and,
208
examining your problems and,
6, 12
exercise, 6, 206, 208, 222, 253,
254
nutrition and eating, 6, 12,
104, 252
overview, 242–243
reducing health and lifestyle
risks, 251–254
Heredity. See Genetic factors
Hindsight
feel the future and, 178–182
nonverbal working memory and,
77–78, 79–80
relationships and, 233–234
saying the past and the future,
166–170
seeing the past and the future,
163–165
self-control and, 68
Homework, 206–207
Human resources department
(disability specialist), 221
Humor, sense of, 194–196, 241
Hyperactivity
diagnosis and, 27–30, 33,
270–271
examining your problems and,
6–7
impulse control and, 58–61
presentations of ADHD, 34–36
Hyperfocusing, 62–63
Illegal behaviors. See Criminal
behavior and legal problems
Imagery
avoiding injuries and, 250
external and tangible problem
solving and, 189–193
feel the future and, 180–182
money management and,
226–227
saying the past and the future
and, 166–170
seeing the past and the future
and, 163–165
Impairments. See also Problems
experienced with ADHD
criminal behavior and legal
problems, 86, 262–263,
267–268
daily responsibilities, 31, 34,
171–177, 178–182, 236
driving, 23–24, 29, 31, 34, 114,
242–250
examining how symptoms affect
your life, 11–12, 30–31, 49–56
executive functions and, 72
family functioning, 104, 114,
228, 235–240
health-related behaviors and
choices, 6, 12, 114, 208,
242–243, 251–254
lifestyle risks, 242–243, 251–254
medication for ADHD and, 119,
149–152
money management, 6, 12, 29,
31, 34, 114, 224–231
nonverbal working memory and,
79–82
overview, 11, 197–198
planning and problem solving
and, 93–95
relationship functioning, 12,
31, 34, 74–76, 81, 82–83, 114,
213, 222–223, 232–240, 241
school functioning, 12, 16, 25,
31, 34, 36, 114, 199–209,
267, 268
self-awareness and, 75–76
self-regulation of emotion and,
91–92
substance use, 12, 39, 125,
126, 131, 139, 246–247, 252,
253–254, 262–268
substance use in, 16
work functioning, 12, 31, 34,
105, 113, 210–221, 222
Impulsivity and impulse control.
See also Inhibition; Self-
control/self-management
accepting a diagnosis of ADHD
and, 33
avoiding injuries and, 248–250
considering the consequences of
actions, 61–62
criteria for an ADHD diagnosis
and, 29, 270–271
distractions and, 58–61
driving and, 246–247
examining your problems and,
6, 12, 31, 52–53, 160–162
executive functions and, 70–71
hyperfocusing (problem
perseveration), 62–63
money management and,
224–225, 229, 230–231
neurological factors and,
116–117
overview, 47, 58, 63
parenting with ADHD and,
238
presentations of ADHD and,
34–36
reducing health and lifestyle
risks, 253
self-regulation of emotion and,
91
stopping the action and,
159–162
verbal working memory and,
84–87
Inattention. See also Distraction

224–225, 229, 230–231
neurological factors and,
116–117
overview, 47, 58, 63
parenting with ADHD and,
238
presentations of ADHD and,
34–36
reducing health and lifestyle
risks, 253
self-regulation of emotion and,
91
stopping the action and,
159–162
verbal working memory and,
84–87
Inattention. See also Distraction
accepting a diagnosis of ADHD
and, 33
criteria for an ADHD diagnosis
and, 27–30, 269–270
presentations of ADHD, 34–36
Incentives, external. See Rewards
Inhibition. See also Executive
functioning; Impulsivity and
impulse control
distractions and, 58–61
examining your problems and,
52–53
neurological factors and,
116–117
overview, 47, 48, 63, 70–71, 73
psychological testing and, 25
self-control and, 68
Injuries, accidental, 243, 248–250
Instructions. See Externalizing
information
Intelligence, 9, 25
Internet use, 12, 217
Interrupting others
criteria for an ADHD diagnosis
and, 29
saying the past and the future,
166–170
self-awareness and, 75
social violations you may not
realize you’re committing,
234
Intuniv (guanfacine XR),
141–143. See also Medication;
Nonstimulants
Irritability, 130
Is It You, Me, or Adult A.D.D.
(Pera), 235–236
Jobs. See Work functioning
Journal writing and other tools to
help externalize information,
98, 100, 171–177, 191–193,
204, 221
Learning disabilities (LDs)
in addition to ADHD, 16
overview, 201–202
presentations of ADHD and, 36
psychological testing and, 25

Index 289
Legal problems and criminal
behavior, 86, 262–263,
267–268
Life coaching, 213
Life expectancy, 7, 253
Lifestyle risks, 242–243, 251–254.
See also Health-related
behaviors and choices; Risky
behaviors; Substance use
List making and other tools to
help externalize information,
98, 100, 171–177, 191–193
Listening. See also Comprehension
overview, 47
relationships and, 236
social violations you may not
realize you’re committing, 234
verbal working memory and,
83–84, 86–87
Lists, 174–175
Longitudinal studies, 111
Loud talking, 75, 84
Marijuana use, 265
Marriage. See also Family
functioning
accepting a diagnosis of ADHD
and, 34
considering medication and, 114
money management and, 228
overview, 235–236
Medical exam, 145–146, 252, 253
Medical problems
medications for ADHD and,
127, 139–140
physical exam and interview
prior to prescribing
medications and, 145–146
reducing health and lifestyle
risks, 252
ruling out other causes of
symptoms and, 15, 39
Medication. See also
Nonstimulants; Stimulants;
Treatment options
ADHD Symptom Tracking
Scale form, 153–155
alpha-2 hypertension drugs, 117
avoiding injuries and, 250
benefits of getting a diagnosis
and, 41
driving and, 247–248
educational functioning and,
203
effectiveness of, 17, 116–120,
138
employment and, 220
finding the right medication
and dosage, 146–149
list of, 121–122, 124
monitoring, 149–152
options for, 120–122
overview, 115, 121, 145, 157
owning your ADHD and, 103
physical exam and interview
prior to prescribing, 145–146
as a reason to seek professional
help, 17
reasons to consider, 113–114
reducing health and lifestyle
risks, 254
substance use issues and, 266
supporting with other
treatments, tools, and
strategies, 152
Memory. See also Hindsight;
Nonverbal working memory;
Verbal working memory;
Working memory
examining in yourself, 50–51,
172–173
externalizing key information,
171–177
psychological testing and, 25
relationships and, 236
self-control and, 68
Mental and emotional disorders

treatments, tools, and
strategies, 152
Memory. See also Hindsight;
Nonverbal working memory;
Verbal working memory;
Working memory
examining in yourself, 50–51,
172–173
externalizing key information,
171–177
psychological testing and, 25
relationships and, 236
self-control and, 68
Mental and emotional disorders
antisocial personality disorder
(ASPD), 16, 255, 258–259
anxiety disorders, 16, 36, 114,
119, 129, 260
conduct disorder (CD), 16, 36,
258–259
considering medication and,
114, 119
depression and related disorders,
16, 36, 114, 119, 261
feel the future and, 178–182
money management and,
226–227
oppositional defiant disorder
(ODD), 16, 36, 257–258
overview, 255–257
personality disorders, 16, 255,
258–259, 271
preparing for the evaluation
and, 24
presentations of ADHD and, 36
ruling out other causes of
symptoms and, 15
Mental imagery. See Imagery
Mentors, 203–204, 220–221
Metadate (methylphenidate), 122,
124. See also Medication;
Stimulants
Meth use, 266–268
Methylin (methylphenidate), 121,
122, 124. See also Medication;
Stimulants
Methylphenidate. See also
Medication; Stimulants
Concerta, 122, 124, 132–133, 148
Focalin, 121, 122, 124, 148–149
Metadate, 122, 124
Methylin, 121, 122, 124
Ritalin, 121, 122, 124, 125–126,
128, 129, 135–136, 148, 266
Mindfulness meditation, 236
Mind’s eye. See Foresight;
Hindsight; Nonverbal
working memory
Mind’s voice. See Communication;
Foresight; Hindsight; Self-
talk; Verbal working memory
Modafinil (Provigil), 143. See also
Medication; Nonstimulants
Money management
accepting a diagnosis of ADHD
and, 34
considering medication and, 114
criteria for an ADHD diagnosis
and, 29
examining your problems and,
6, 12, 31
getting control of your money,
227–231
overview, 224–227
Moral codes, 84, 86
Mortality, 7, 127
MotivAider, 204–205, 221
Motivation
breaking down tasks into
smaller chunks, 100, 183–188
employment and, 218
examining your problems with,
53–54, 179–181
feel the future and, 178–182
overview, 48
self-regulation of emotion and,
88–89
Multistep tasks, 80. See also Task
completion
Myths regarding ADHD, 104, 121
Neurological factors
effectiveness of medication and,
116–117, 118, 121
examining research evidence
and, 111
executive functions and, 70
hyperactivity and, 60
normalizing, 99
overview, 46, 104
owning your ADHD and, 103
Nicotine use, 253, 265–266
Nonstimulants. See also
Medication
finding the right medication
and dosage, 146–149
Intuniv (guanfacine XR),
141–143
overview, 117, 137, 143–144
Provigil (modafinil), 143
Strattera (atomoxetine),
137–141
Wellbutrin (bupropion), 143
Nonverbal working memory. See
also Executive functioning;
Memory; Working memory
examining in yourself, 164–165

290 Index
Nonverbal working memory (cont.)
external and tangible problem
solving and, 189–193
money management and,
224–225
options for, 120–122
overview, 76–82
seeing the past and the future
and, 163–165
self-control and, 68, 87
Norepinephrine
effectiveness of medication
and, 117
nonstimulants and, 137–138,
143
stimulants and, 124–125
Norms, 30, 32, 55–56, 271–276
Note taking and other tools to
help externalize information,
98, 100, 171–177, 191–193,
205–206, 222
Nutrition, 6, 12, 104, 252
Offloading working memory
demands, 98, 100, 171–177,
191–193. See also Working
memory
Oppositional defiant disorder
(ODD), 16, 36, 257–258
Organization
considering medication and, 113
educational functioning and,
204
examining your problems and,

98, 100, 171–177, 191–193,
205–206, 222
Nutrition, 6, 12, 104, 252
Offloading working memory
demands, 98, 100, 171–177,
191–193. See also Working
memory
Oppositional defiant disorder
(ODD), 16, 36, 257–258
Organization
considering medication and, 113
educational functioning and,
204
examining your problems and,
50–51
overview, 47
planning and problem solving
and, 94
working environment and, 217
Overspending
examining your problems and,
12
money management and, 224,
226, 227–229, 230
verbal working memory and,
83, 85
Owning your ADHD
acceptance and, 103–106
diagnosis and, 31–36, 41–43,
102
examining your problems and,
55–56
having a sense of humor and,
194–196
overview, 42, 101–102
seeing the diagnosis as an
explanation rather than an
excuse, 102
Parenting, 31, 104, 236–240
Patience, 81. See also Delaying
gratification
Perimenopause, 39
Perseveration, problem, 62–63
Persistence, 28–29, 48
Personality disorders, 16, 255,
258–259, 271
Physical exam, 145–146, 252, 253
Physical tools. See Tools to deal
with your ADHD
Physician. See also Professional
help and evaluations
finding the right medication
and dosage, 146–149
obtaining a diagnostic
evaluation and, 19–20
physical exam and interview
prior to prescribing
medications, 145–146
questions to ask prior to making
an appointment, 21
Planners and other tools to help
externalize information,
98, 100, 171–177, 185–186,
191–193, 204, 221
Planning
examining your problems and,
49–50
money management and, 227
overview, 47, 48, 92–95
saying the past and the future,
166–170
sense of time and, 96–97
verbal working memory and,
83, 85
Predominantly hyperactive
presentation of ADHD,
34–36
Predominantly inattentive
presentation of ADHD,
34–36
Pregnancy, 128
Presentations of ADHD, 34–36.
See also Diagnosis
Primary care physician. See
Physician; Professional help
and evaluations
Probability blindness, 243
Problem perseveration, 62–63
Problem solving
examining your problems and,
50–51, 190
external and tangible problem
solving, 189–193
money management and, 227
overview, 48, 92–95
parenting with ADHD and, 238
verbal working memory and,
83, 84
Problems experienced
with ADHD. See also
Impairments; Symptoms of
ADHD; individual problems
and symptoms
coexisting disorders and, 16
describing, 5–7
examining how symptoms affect
your life, 11–12, 49–56
fitting treatments, strategies,
tools, and coping methods to,
97–100
how long you’ve struggled with,
8–10
identifying via professional
evaluation, 17–18
monitoring medication
treatment and, 149–152
overview, 46–48, 56–57
presentations of ADHD, 34–36
professional help and, 13, 14–18
Procrastination, 63
Professional help and evaluations.
See also Medication;
Treatment options
accepting the professional’s
conclusions from an
evaluation, 31–36
answers you can expect to receive
from an evaluation, 26–27
coexisting disorders and, 16
considering medication and, 113
criteria for an ADHD diagnosis
and, 27–30
disagreeing with a professional’s
conclusions from an
evaluation, 36–39
examining your problems and,
6, 10–11, 30–31
identifying strengths and
weaknesses and, 17–18
medications for ADHD and, 17,
145–152
money management and, 230
parenting with ADHD and,
238, 239–240
physical exam, 145–146
preparing for the evaluation,
22–25
questions to ask prior to making
an appointment, 21
reasons to seek professional
help/evaluation, 7, 14–18
ruling out other causes of
symptoms and, 15
when to seek out, 13

145–152
money management and, 230
parenting with ADHD and,
238, 239–240
physical exam, 145–146
preparing for the evaluation,
22–25
questions to ask prior to making
an appointment, 21
reasons to seek professional
help/evaluation, 7, 14–18
ruling out other causes of
symptoms and, 15
when to seek out, 13
where to obtain, 19–21, 284
Provigil (modafinil), 143. See also
Medication; Nonstimulants
Psychological testing, 24–25
Psychological therapies, 41, 113.
See also Treatment options
Randomized, controlled, double-
blind trial, 110
Reacting
relationships and, 233, 236
saying the past and the future,
166–170
self-awareness and, 73–74

Index 291
self-regulation of emotion and,
89–90, 91
stimulants and, 130
stopping the action and,
159–162
Reading. See also Comprehension
employment and, 222
tips for handling homework
and, 206–207
verbal working memory and,
83–84, 86–87
Records to bring to the evaluation,
22–23
Referral for professional
evaluation/treatment, 19–20.
See also Professional help and
evaluations
Reinforcers, 99–100. See also
Rewards
Relationship functioning
accepting a diagnosis of ADHD
and, 34
considering medication and, 114
emotional regulation and, 233
employment and, 222–223
examining your problems and,
12, 31
finding the right job and, 213
friendships, 241
nonverbal working memory
and, 81
overview, 232–233, 235–236
parenting and, 236–240
self-awareness and, 74–76,
233–234
social interactions and, 234–235
verbal working memory and,
82–83
Reminders and other tools to help
externalize information, 98,
100, 171–177, 191–193
Research regarding ADHD,
106–111, 119
Resources
finding ADHD professionals
and clinics, 284
list of, 278–281
obtaining a diagnostic
evaluation and, 19–20, 41–43
owning your ADHD and,
106–111
rating scales, 282
relationships and, 235–236
sources of scientific data, 277
websites, 282–284
Responsibilities
accepting a diagnosis of ADHD
and, 34
evaluating how symptoms affect
your life, 31
externalizing key information
and, 171–177
feel the future and, 178–182
relationships and, 236
Restlessness, 30, 58–61
Rewards
breaking goals and tasks into
smaller units and, 187–188
employment and, 218
feel the future and, 178–182
fitting treatments, strategies,
tools, and coping methods
to your specific problems
and, 99
replacing distractions with
reinforcers, 99–100
self-control and, 66–67, 88–89
Risky behaviors
avoiding injuries and, 248–250
considering medication and,
114
examining your problems and,
6, 12
overview, 242–243
Ritalin (methylphenidate). See
Medication; Stimulants
Routines, 113, 171
Rules. See also Rules for everyday
success
employment and, 218
externalizing reminders of, 100
fitting treatments, strategies,
tools, and coping methods
to your specific problems
and, 98
verbal working memory and, 83,
84–86
Rules for everyday success. See
also Tools to deal with your
ADHD
breaking goals and tasks into
smaller units, 183–188
educational functioning and,
203
external and tangible problem
solving, 189–193
externalizing key information,
171–177
feel the future, 178–182
having a sense of humor,
194–196
list of, 196
overview, 157–158
saying the past and the future,
166–170
seeing the past and the future,
163–165
stopping the action, 159–162
Sadness, 130
Safety strategies, 247–250,
251–254
Savings, 12, 85, 167–168, 224,
227–229
Saying the past and the future
rule, 166–170
Scheduling, 205
School functioning
accepting a diagnosis of ADHD

saying the past and the future,
166–170
seeing the past and the future,
163–165
stopping the action, 159–162
Sadness, 130
Safety strategies, 247–250,
251–254
Savings, 12, 85, 167–168, 224,
227–229
Saying the past and the future
rule, 166–170
Scheduling, 205
School functioning
accepting a diagnosis of ADHD
and, 34
considering medication and,
114
evaluating how symptoms affect
your life, 31
examining your problems and,
12
hard drug use and, 267
learning disabilities (LDs) and,
16, 25, 36, 201–202
overview, 199–202
presentations of ADHD and,
36
substance use issues and, 268
treatments, strategies, tools, and
tips for, 202–209
Second opinions, 36–37. See
also Professional help and
evaluations
Seeing the past and the future
rule, 163–165
Self-assessment
checklist for, 49–56
examining your problems and,
5–7, 8–10
finding the right job and,
211–213
Self-awareness
fitting treatments, strategies,
tools, and coping methods to
your specific problems and,
97–98
nonverbal working memory and,
78, 80–81
overview, 73–76
relationships and, 233–234
verbal working memory and, 84
Self-care, 6, 237, 240
Self-control/self-management. See
also Executive functioning;
Impulsivity and impulse
control; Inhibition; Time
blindness
emotions and, 87–92
examining your problems and,
49–50, 52–53, 54–55
fitting treatments, strategies,
tools, and coping methods to
your specific problems and,
97–100
oppositional defiant disorder
(ODD) and, 257
overview, 47, 48, 64–65, 197
planning and problem solving
and, 93–94
processes involved in, 65–68
stopping the action and,
159–162
Self-directed action, 66
Self-motivation, 48, 53–54, 88–89.
See also Motivation
Self-organization, 50–51

292 Index
Self-talk
avoiding injuries and, 250
feel the future and, 180
money management and,
226–227
saying the past and the future,
166–170
self-regulation of emotion and,
87–88, 89–90
verbal working memory and, 84
Serotonin, 143
Sexual behavior, 6, 12, 31,
250–251
Sharing, 78–79
Shopping, 85, 225–226, 230
Side effects from medication,
128–131, 138, 139–140,
142–143. See also Medication
Sleep, 6, 12
Sluggish cognitive tempo (SCT),
34–36
Smart devices. See also Cell
phones and other tools to
help externalize information
educational functioning and,
205–206
employment and, 221
journal writing and, 176
myths regarding causes of
ADHD and, 104
Smoking, 253, 265–266
Social interactions, 34, 234–235
Sources of information in the
evaluation, 22–25
Specialist, 19–20, 21. See also
Professional help and
evaluations
Specific learning disabilities, 25.
See also Learning disabilities
(LDs)
Spending behavior
examining your problems and,
12
money management and, 224,
226, 227–229, 230
verbal working memory and,
83, 85
SQ4R method, 206–207, 222
Stimulants. See also Medication
Adderall (amphetamine), 122,
124, 129, 136, 148–149
Concerta (methylphenidate),
122, 124, 132–133, 148
Dexedrine (amphetamine),
122, 124
Dextrostat (amphetamine),
122, 124
finding the right medication
and dosage, 146–149
Focalin (methylphenidate), 121,
122, 124, 148–149
list of, 124
Metadate (methylphenidate),
122, 124
Methylin (methylphenidate),
121, 122, 124
options for, 120–122, 132–136
overview, 117, 123–126
pros and cons of, 123–124
Ritalin (methylphenidate), 121,
122, 124, 125–126, 128, 129,
135–136, 148, 266
safety of, 126–128
side effects, 128–131
Vyvanse (amphetamine), 122,
124, 134–135, 136, 148
Stopping the action rule, 159–162
Strategies to deal with your

options for, 120–122, 132–136
overview, 117, 123–126
pros and cons of, 123–124
Ritalin (methylphenidate), 121,
122, 124, 125–126, 128, 129,
135–136, 148, 266
safety of, 126–128
side effects, 128–131
Vyvanse (amphetamine), 122,
124, 134–135, 136, 148
Stopping the action rule, 159–162
Strategies to deal with your
ADHD. See also Rules for
everyday success; Tools
to deal with your ADHD;
individual strategies
benefits of getting a diagnosis
and, 41
educational functioning and,
202–209
effectiveness of medication
and, 118
employment and, 220–221
fitting to your specific problems
and needs, 97–100
money management and,
227–231
overview, 97
relationships and, 236
shaping your environment and,
105–106
supporting medication with, 152
Strattera (atomoxetine),
137–141. See also Medication;
Nonstimulants
Strengths, 17–18, 105–106
Studying, 207–209
Substance use. See also Addiction
in addition to ADHD, 16
avoiding or stopping, 268
driving and, 246–247
examining your problems and, 12
medications for ADHD and,
125, 126, 131, 139
overview, 262–268
reducing health and lifestyle
risks, 252, 253–254
ruling out other causes of
symptoms and, 39
substance use disorders, 263
Success rules. See Rules for
everyday success
Sugar, 104
Support from others
benefits of getting a diagnosis
and, 42
breaking goals and tasks into
smaller units and, 186–187
educational functioning and,
203–204, 207–209
effectiveness of medication
and, 118
employment and, 219, 220–221,
222–223
externalizing key information,
171–172
finding the right job and, 213
fitting treatments, strategies,
tools, and coping methods
to your specific problems
and, 98
money management and, 226,
228, 229
parenting with ADHD and, 240
Symptoms of ADHD. See also
Problems experienced with
ADHD
ADHD Symptom Tracking
Scale form, 153–155
answers you can expect to
receive from an evaluation,
26–27
coexisting disorders and, 16
criteria for an ADHD diagnosis
and, 27–30, 269–271
effectiveness of medication
and, 17
examining, 5–7
examining your problems and,
11–12, 30–31
exploring all possible causes
of, 15
how long you’ve struggled with,
8–10
overview, 10–11, 271–276
presentations of ADHD, 34–36
professional evaluation and help
and, 13, 14–18, 26–27
stimulants and, 124–125
Tactile cueing device, 204–205,
221
Talking too loud, 75, 84
Talking too much. See also
Interrupting others
saying the past and the future,
166–170
self-awareness and, 75
social violations you may not
realize you’re committing,
234
verbal working memory and, 84
Task completion, 80, 171–177,
178–182, 183–188
Technology and other tools to help
externalize information, 98,
100, 104, 171–177, 191–193,
248
Test taking, 207
Testing, psychological, 24–25
Testing for ADHD. See
Professional help and
evaluations
Therapy, psychological, 41, 113.
See also Treatment options

Task completion, 80, 171–177,
178–182, 183–188
Technology and other tools to help
externalize information, 98,
100, 104, 171–177, 191–193,
248
Test taking, 207
Testing, psychological, 24–25
Testing for ADHD. See
Professional help and
evaluations
Therapy, psychological, 41, 113.
See also Treatment options

Index 293
Thinking, 94, 159–162
Tics and tic disorders, 16, 131
Time blindness
breaking down tasks into
smaller chunks, 100
considering medication and, 113
to-do lists and, 175
employment and, 218–219
evaluating how symptoms affect
your life, 31, 49–50
feel the future and, 178–182
nonverbal working memory and,
78, 79
overview, 5, 47
sense of time and, 96–97
working environment and, 217
“Time off the clock”
accommodation for test
taking, 207
Timers, 99, 221, 239
To-do lists and other tools to help
externalize information, 98,
100, 171–177, 191–193
Tools to deal with your ADHD.
See also Externalizing
information; Rules for
everyday success; Strategies
to deal with your ADHD
benefits of getting a diagnosis
and, 41
educational functioning and,
202–209
effectiveness of medication
and, 118
employment and, 220–221
external and tangible problem
solving and, 189–193
fitting to your specific problems
and needs, 97–100
money management and,
227–231
overview, 97
supporting medication with, 152
Tourette syndrome, 16, 131
Transition planning, 97–98
Treatment options. See also
Medication; Professional help
and evaluations
anxiety disorders and, 260
benefits of getting a diagnosis
and, 41–43
conduct disorder/antisocial
personality disorder and, 259
considering medication and,
113
depression and, 261
fitting to your specific problems
and needs, 97–100
oppositional defiant disorder
(ODD) and, 257–258
overview, 97
as a reason to seek professional
help, 17
reasons to seek an evaluation, 7
substance use issues and, 268
supporting medication with, 152
Tutoring, 207, 223
Verbal working memory. See
also Executive functioning;
Memory; Working memory
examining in yourself, 167–170
external and tangible problem
solving and, 189–193
money management and, 226
overview, 82–87
saying the past and the future,
166–170
Vicarious learning, 77, 80. See also
Nonverbal working memory
Video games, 12, 104
Visual aids, 165
Visualizing
external and tangible problem
solving and, 189–193
feel the future and, 180–182
saying the past and the future
and, 166–170
seeing the past and the future
and, 163–165
Vocational counseling, 213
Vyvanse (amphetamine). See
Medication; Stimulants
Weaknesses, 17–18, 105–106
Wellbutrin (bupropion), 143.
See also Medication;
Nonstimulants
Work functioning. See also
Impairments; Workplace
accommodations
accepting a diagnosis of ADHD
and, 34
considering medication and, 113
evaluating how symptoms affect
your life, 31
examining your problems and,
12
excelling at and advancement
and, 222
finding the right job, 211–220
overview, 210–211
shaping your environment and,
105
supervisors and coworkers, 219
treatments, strategies, tools, and
tips for, 220–221
types of work that may be more
ADHD-friendly, 214–216
work procedures, 218–219
working environment and,
216–217
Working memory. See also
Memory; Nonverbal working
memory; Verbal working
memory
examining in yourself, 50–51,
172–173
external and tangible problem
solving and, 189–193
externalizing key information
and, 171–177
self-control and, 68
tips for handling homework
and, 206–207
Workplace accommodations. See

Working memory. See also
Memory; Nonverbal working
memory; Verbal working
memory
examining in yourself, 50–51,
172–173
external and tangible problem
solving and, 189–193
externalizing key information
and, 171–177
self-control and, 68
tips for handling homework
and, 206–207
Workplace accommodations. See
also Work functioning
college ADHD liaison and, 204
interviewing for the job and,
219–220
note taking, 205
overview, 202–203, 220
reasons to seek professional
help, 15, 42
test taking, 207
Writing in a journal and other
tools to help externalize
information, 98, 100,
171–177, 191–193, 204, 221

294
About the Authors
Russell A. Barkley, PhD, ABPP, ABCN, is internationally known for his career-
long research into ADHD and his efforts to educate professionals and the public.
He is Clinical Professor of Psychiatry at the Virginia Commonwealth University
School of Medicine. The recipient of awards from the American Academy of
Pediatrics and the American Psychological Association, among other honors, Dr.
Barkley has published and lectured widely on ADHD and related disorders. His
website is www.russellbarkley.org.
Christine M. Benton is a Chicago-based writer and editor.
